==== Astrologer (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Astrologer receives portents of events to come, and learns when one has come to pass.
CREDIT: Additional credit: Vyvvyx
HOW: Statements should relate to the game in some fashion, and can either be straightforward or cryptic, depending on how you wish to run the character. If the Astrologer is sober, at least one of the statements should be something that could happen during the game. // Reminder tokens are provided in order to mark notable events if they should be linked to a specific character or player.
TIPS: Firstly, the statements you learn may potentially hint towards things that could happen during the game, so that alone may serve as valuable information to the town. // But, more importantly, if you ever wake to learn a "yes", now you know that something you learned has indeed come to pass! Now it's time to puzzle out what may have happened based on existing information, and using that information to help solve the game state. // Alternatively, you may never learn a yes, meaning that none of the three things you learned have come to pass - and that can potentially be equally useful.
BLUFF: Bluffing as the Astrologer requires a bit of work ahead of time, but can wreak havoc if you convince town that your statements are legitimate. Make predictions about events that could - but will never - come to pass in this game. Town will likely work with your statements when given, and then once you drop the "yes" on them, town will likely scramble for days to try to figure out what it could mean. Crucially, noting that you've not yet received confirmation may be a good cause to keep you alive. // Alternatively, you may want to be truthful in your predictions, and dissuade town from those notions once it's revealed that you're evil. If you're in a town that may be quick to discover what you really are, this could be an equally effective strategy!
EX: Laura is the Astrologer. They receive the following on Night 1: // "Outsiders kissing" // "Tie a bow around the Demon" // "Surrounded by evil" // On Night 3, Laura learns a yes. One of the above statements has come to pass, and the town intuits that the Fang Gu may have jumped to the Sweetheart. // George is the Imp bluffing as the Astrologer. They give the following statements: // "A Minion dies at night" // "Protection from death" // "Neighbouring the Demon" // George sinks a kill on Night 4, and "learns" a yes the same night, confirming their Minion who is bluffing as the Monk.

==== Banker (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Banker learns roles in play, but only one of them is real.
HOW: STs can give any three roles that are valid. You can provide three good roles, up to two evil roles, Outsiders, etc: all are suitable depending on the game state.
TIPS: As a first day info role, you are spent immediately, but unlike a lot of first day roles, you may want to hold on to your information until later in the game. As roles are slowly outed, you'll be able to parse out which role is out-of-play, and with some confirmation, perhaps you can figure out which role was seen as a bluff! Inversely, holding on to your information may frame you unnecessarily, so giving your information to a trusted player early might help ensure your account can be relied upon. // Additionally, if you receive evil roles as part of your info, you can potentially deduce what role may be in, or out of play.
BLUFF: If you're bluffing as the Banker, you already know a Demon bluff - yours. Providing any three roles can frame certain worlds, but if you have a Minion such as a Scarlet Woman, you could even frame your own Demon to gain credibility. Your information is powerful, and obviously, subject to change depending on the world you want to build. // If you want to put an evil character in the three that you learn, you can frame certain Minions or Demons as being either in-play or not-in-play: this might lead town to build worlds around your information, and lead them to incorrect conclusions!
EX: Penny is the sober healthy Banker. She sees the Steward, the Empath, and the Fortune Teller. All three roles are claimed by other players, suggesting that one of the three is the role they claim, another is bluffing an out-of-play role, and one is evil. // Mitch is the Baron bluffing as the Banker. He says he sees the Poppy Grower, the Pixie, and the No Dashii. A No Dashii is in play, and knows that a Poppy Grower is not. The Pixie may, as a result, be lead to believe that the demon is not a No Dashii.

==== Cartographer (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Cartographer learns where the majority of good players might reside.
HOW: Characters that misregister, such as the Recluse or Spy, can impact the Cartographer's information.
TIPS: Find your line! This is essential especially if the number of adjacent good players is a large one, so finding the chunk of players who are more likely to be trusted than not is of great help to town. This is a role that can easily extract claims from players if your number seems reliable, so you can serve as a valuable conduit for information, and create confirmations around your own information. // Remember that Outsiders count as good players, but Outsiders that cause misregistration such as the Spy or Recluse can corrupt your information. Keep this in mind when putting together worlds.
BLUFF: There are two ways to bluff as the Cartographer: you can either include yourself and perhaps Minions in the longest line of "good" players - or alternatively, you might consider placing the line where it actually is to lend credence to your bluff, especially if you know that certain roles will be able to confirm other good players. Just because the number is accurate doesn't mean you can't shift the line slightly to include those you need to protect.
EX: Danny is the Cartographer who learns two players, one of which is himself. Near him is the Grandmother confirming a nearby player, and a neighbour dies at night. It is likely that Danny is in the longest line of good players. // Kris is the Assassin, bluffing as the Cartographer. He notes that the longest line of good players includes the Scarlet Woman. The Scarlet Woman proceeds to push on those outside of the line, including the Demon.

==== Chameleon (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Chameleon sheds its role each night for something new, but may gain something unfavourable in the process.
HOW: Balance the Chameleon's ability around how town is faring: selecting the best ability or abilities from available roles based on whether the Chameleon's team is winning ensures the character helps their team while still feeling balanced. // Try to give the Chameleon "pairs" of roles that prompt similarly, even if the resulting information is different. The Fortune Teller, Innkeeper and Harpy; the Monk, Poisoner and Lycanthrope; the Ravenkeeper, Farmer and Klutz would be valid groups to select from on any given night. // If the Chameleon's team needs a boost, you could consider giving it two roles that aren't compatible in terms of picking and choosing, to guide the Chameleon towards the role they're likely selecting for. You may also want to do this more frequently if the Chameleon is poisoned or drunk. // Note that with Demons that cause "incorrect" information like the Vortox, Chronos or Baku, the Chameleon learns correct roles, if not correct info.
TIPS: Determining which role you have gained each night is essential in decoding your information. A 2 on Night 1 could be a Chef, but it could be a Clockmaker. A 1 on Night 3 could be an Oracle, but it could be an Empath. Triangulate your varied info with that from the town around you in order to make sense of what you have on hand. // You always know which roles you might be gaining information for, so even if you don't receive information, or wake at all, you can be reasonably assured that you are doing something. It's simply your job to know what. // Remember that once per game, you will be given a Minion or Outsider ability, and it's likely you won't know the repercussion of that until it's too late. So be up front with anyone you might adversely affect, prove that you're worth trusting, and hopefully you can keep the damage to a minimum. Better yet - if you believe you've picked up a Minion's ability, why not use it for good, and point it towards those you think are evil?
BLUFF: As the Chameleon, you can craft amazing worlds with a bevy of information from all over the script. Want to make up a Steward ping? You got it. Want to imply that perhaps you were the Lycanthrope who got a kill last night? No problem. Nothing is too farfetched, as long as you sound credible. // At all times, your role is masked with ambiguity, so making fake claims isn't necessarily an admission of evil - just that you might not be receiving the information you think you are. Push on your info to best suit the world you need to build, and don't worry, because you're always able to change your role the next day. // Better yet, if you can coordinate your movements with any in-play Minions, you can even mimic the night you receive an evil ability. If you've made someone Cerenovus mad, let them know it was you to build trust!
EX: Judy is the Chameleon. She learns the roles Chef and Empath on Night 1. She learns Devil's Advocate or Monk on Night 2, and is asked to pick a player. She chooses the Oracle, who dies during the night. On Night 3, she learns Artist or Ravenkeeper, and receives no further prompts. // Jake is the Vortox, bluffing as the Chameleon. He pretends to send a Nightwatchman ping to his Minion, and tells them to pretend that it was instead sent by the other Minion. On Night 2, he kills the Town Crier and says that he was told he could be the Lycanthrope or the Acrobat, selecting the Town Crier, who died. Jake feigns surprise as he assumes he must have picked up the Lycanthrope's ability.

==== Cleric (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Cleric uses its words to protect its allies.
HOW: Consider giving the Cleric a phrase a little more obvious than what you might give a Yaggababble. The Cleric is a Townsfolk and should be in some way discernible by the evil team so that they aren't entirely hidden.
TIPS: Your ability protects players of your choosing, so choose wisely. Unfortunately, your ability can protect evil players in the same way it can protect good ones, so learning who to trust and keeping them safe from execution is invaluable. Use your ability sparingly to ensure you aren't caught out, and spread the good word before it's too late.
BLUFF: If you're a protective role such as the Devil's Advocate, or something that can't die like the Lleech, your options are pretty obvious. Mask your protection - or your immunity - as the Cleric's ability! Alternatively, if no such roles exist but you choose to bluff as the Cleric, consider mis-speaking when saying your phrase, saying it too late, or just flat out implying you're poisoned or drunk as a ploy to insist upon your character, but not necessarily your sobriety.
EX: Zak is the Cleric. On Night 1, he learns the phrase "surprise Virgin!" - Zak says this phrase when nominated, and despite a majority of votes, is not executed that day. // Idris is the Devil's Advocate bluffing as the Cleric, using their ability to protect good players. On Night 4, they choose the Demon, state their 'phrase', and the Demon does not die when executed.

==== Conspiracist (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Conspiracist is convinced a certain player is evil, and learns the truth upon their death.
HOW: As the Storyteller, you choose who the Conspiracist is "mad" towards, and your choice matters. You can confirm neighbours of a good player, uncover an evil player, or target them directly to clear others.
TIPS: The truth is out there! You are convinced that someone in this game is definitely evil, so stick to your guns and don’t let up. Cast aspersions, nominate, spread (mis)information - whatever you need to do to convince your fellow Townsfolk that the target of your ire deserves to die. Whether they are or not is up to the Storyteller, but that’s not really the point, is it? If you maintain this madness, you’ll learn valuable information that confirms the person you’ve been mad about all game, as well as that of a living neighbour, which can go a long way to solving the game. Of course, how you do all of this is up to you, since you can’t reveal your true identity.
BLUFF: Given that the Conspiracist can’t claim who they really are, feel free to double claim others and spread misinformation as you like: other players are likely to catch on to what you’re trying to tell them, and just might overlook the details. Additionally, should you get the player you’ve chosen executed, you then have the option to “confirm” them, and a neighbour, as good or evil. It’s possible, of course, that the player you’ve targeted may be confirmed in other ways, so don’t be too hasty to sell your world if it doesn’t align with what people already know, else you might out yourself in the process. Also note that if you have an "expendable" role such as a Baron, spent Assassin, Marionette, or Demon with a Scarlet Woman, you may want to target them directly, if they neighbour an evil player you want to protect.
EX: Ann is the Conspiracist who has been informed that their chosen player is Will. Ann pushes on Will each day, and on Day 2, Will is executed. Ann learns that Will is good, and one of Ann's neighbours is evil. // Matt is the Marionette, who is being accused of being evil by the Conspiracist. Matt is executed, and the Conspiracist learns that they are evil, but also learns that Matt's neighbour is good. This in turn helps to clear Matt's demon.

==== Daredevil (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Daredevil appears evil and trades its survival for vital information.
HOW: Opt for whichever condition fits the player count: on smaller Grimoires, 5 players will remain before the dead equal the living, so pay close attention to when the Daredevil can die and still receive information. // As with the Sage, you can give the Daredevil other players that register as the Demon, should the need arise.
TIPS: Dying by execution is generally the worst way to go in Blood on the Clocktower, but the Daredevil doesn't live by the rules - it craves execution, so long as it's at just the right time. You register as evil and as the Demon, so town's information will ultimately point to you - but that's precisely what you want, isn't it? So long as you can live just long enough, you'll be privy to some of the most powerful information in the game, which means not only dodging town's accusations, but the Demon, too, who may want to take you out of commission before you're able to gather info. // With that said, there is something to be said for withholding your role, playing conservatively, and trying to steer clear of info roles that might implicate you. Confide in a select few and let them advocate for you, in the event that suspicions arise. And then, when the time is right, give town the grand reveal, getting executed in the process!
BLUFF: A good character who registers as an evil Demon, and can gain information on who the real Demon is when the stakes are highest? Sounds like a perfect Demon bluff - if, and only if, you have some means of carrying on with the game after you're executed. Unlike many roles that gain information at night upon that night's death, you don't have the luxury of passing your demonhood to a Minion or Outsider, so a backup plan is essential if you're going to pull off bluffing as the Daredevil. A Scarlet Woman, a Lil' Monsta that has changed hands, or a Pit Hag who can turn an Evil Twin into a Demon are all viable fallbacks, but each come with their own distinct downsides. You'll be trading power for information, and sway within town, so consider that before going through with your master plan.
EX: Carla is the Daredevil. She immediately claims to her neighbour, the Gossip, and has been seen as a possible Demon by the Fortune Teller. The Gossip uses their ability to confirm the Daredevil is in play, ultimately convincing the Fortune Teller to withhold their information on Carla. On Day 4, Carla is executed, and gains her information that night. // Terry is the Ein bluffing as the Daredevil. Having been seen by multiple players as the Demon, he advocates for his own execution later in the game. He claims to learn that night that two players - neither of whom are the Zwei he has just passed to - are the Demon.

==== Dentist (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Dentist learns which characters are dead or alive.
HOW: If a character is not in play, the answer is "no". If multiples of a character exist, such as a Village Idiot, Lost Lover, or Fang Gu (in the event of a jump), the answer should be "yes", even if others of that character are alive.
TIPS: Your power comes not just from confirming the claimed roles of dead players, as an Undertaker might - you can also confirm when certain Demons may have "jumped" in the night. Consider who has been executed, or players who have previously died at night, and the roles they have been claiming: if you sense there's a disparity between what a player is claiming and the information you've received, it's possible that you've found an evil player claiming a Demon bluff. But tread lightly, as your role is a powerful one, and the evil team will be looking to neutralise you sooner rather than later.
BLUFF: As an evil player bluffing as the Dentist, it's up to you to sell worlds. If your Fang Gu has jumped, tell town that the role they were claiming has been seen as dead, to ensure you cover their tracks. Or perhaps you may want to discredit powerful information by noting that you've seen that role as alive, despite the fact that a good player is claiming to have died as that character. If they are, for instance, a Ravenkeeper who has seen an evil player as their role, you can always turn around the next day and say you checked the Ravenkeeper and received a "no". Doing so will help to keep suspicion off your Demon, and frame other player as necessary.
EX: Zak is the Dentist who has received a claim stating that a player recently killed in the night was the Sage. Zak chooses the Sage the next night and learns that they are not dead, meaning that if their information is true, Zak knows that their information is false, and likely in support of evil. // Minnie is a Minion bluffing Dentist in a No Dashii game. They claim to have checked the Fang Gu and received a "yes". This in turn frames living Outsiders, and implies that one of the poisoned players might be a Drunk who was jumped to by the Fang Gu.

==== Disciple (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Disciple is created by the Evangelist, and helps them know their neighbours.
HOW: When building scripts, remember to include the Evangelist as an extra character (ie. 14 total Townsfolk as opposed to the normal 13).
TIPS: Congratulations on being selected by the Evangelist! In your new role, you learn whether the Evangelist neighbours a living evil player. While that's all you learn, it is nonetheless powerful, and might give you a little extra information in addition to what you may have already gleaned. Additionally, if the Evangelist spoke with you during the day noting that they might be choosing you at night, you can be inclined to trust their claim, since you have some level of mechanical confirmation to speak to. Go, child, and spread the good word.
BLUFF: Congratulations on being selected by the Evangelist! What a shame they've picked an evil player who has no intention of turning, though. // Unless... // As the Disciple, whether good or evil, remember that you do register as a Townsfolk, so if you're a spent Minion, such as the Baron or Widow with a dead poisoned player, you may want to accept the Evangelist's kind offer to mess with other information. A Ravenkeeper with suspicion towards you will see you as the Disciple; a Balloonist will receive you in their pings as a Townsfolk; and so much more. // Whether you accept the Evangelist's offer or not, give them information that best frames the world you're trying to build: clear their neighbours if evil, or frame them if good. It's totally up to you!
EX: Sage is the Evangelist who selects Dan at night. Dan is a spent Chef, and so they accept Sage's offer, turning into the Disciple. Dan learns that there are no evil players beside him. // Ben, the Baron, has been selected by the Evangelist at night. They accept. The next day, they nominate the Evangelist's good neighbour, but do not trigger the Town Crier's ability.

==== Evangelist (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Evangelist can make another player their Disciple, but doesn't know their true intentions.
HOW: When building scripts, remember to include the Disciple as an extra character (ie. 14 total Townsfolk as opposed to the normal 13).
TIPS: You are, more or less, a good Pit Hag who can turn a player into a trusted Disciple. But finding a suitable target for this ability is tricky, since you never learn if the player you've selected actually accepted your ability. Are they really the Disciple with a good read on your living neighbours? Or are they a Minion who declined, but is bluffing the information anyway? You may never know, but finding roles that can confirm players' identities can help greatly, so work with them to ensure your Disciple is on the level. If so, you can help create a chain of confirmation that can potentially lead to a solve.
BLUFF: Instead of creating confirmation among good players, why not create a dynamic duo on the evil team? It's risky, but with information on your side, you can pair up with a fellow evil player to clear players on either side, creating trust, or close the walls in on an already framed evil player. Just know that as the Evangelist, you and your Disciple are both prime targets for suspicion if those players are cleared by other means. // Alternatively, if you have a Pit Hag in play, you may want to consider turning a spent Minion into the Evangelist to have them attempt to convert someone else! Doing so will give some level of mechanical confirmation in the eyes of that player, and could help sway voting later on.
EX: Sage is the Evangelist who selects Dan at night. Dan is a spent Chef, and so they accept Sage's offer, turning into the Disciple. Dan learns that there are no evil players neighbouring Sage. // Lachlan is the Evangelist who tells Fred, a Minion, that they will be selecting them to become a Disciple at night. Fred declines Lachlan's ability, but claims that they accepted it, learning that Lachlan's living neighbours - the Demon and a good player - are both good.

==== Gatekeeper (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Gatekeeper learns characters who aren't in the game, but has to risk exposing themselves to do so.
HOW: The Gatekeeper is strongest in larger games: consider reserving their use for games with around 9-13 players: any less, and the Gatekeeper’s information is difficult to work with, and with more, there is a likelihood that the Gatekeeper almost immediately begins to receive Demon bluffs. Remember that not-in-play Outsiders, Minions and Demons are also valid to provide, so consider giving these to the Gatekeeper, especially if good is struggling.
TIPS: In order to gain information at night, you have to nominate during the day: doing so may potentially signal to evil that you are the Gatekeeper, so it may be worth being a little sparing with your accusations. Either way, your information can be extremely helpful to your team, as it may expose bluffs, provide information about what evil characters are in play, and in some instances, may be game-solving!
BLUFF: Nominate, nominate, nominate. You know what Minions and Demons are not-in-play, so consider either providing true information to gain trust, or spreading misinformation to guide good down the wrong path. Given that your “ability” is gated behind nominations, you can pull double duty and cast aspersions against good Townsfolk to potentially get them off the board at the same time, but remember that if town is inclined to question your information, any or all of it may be reverse engineered into helpful information for town.
EX: Annie is the Gatekeeper. They nominate a player during the day, and at night, learn that the Seamstress - a demon bluff - is not in play. // Julia is an evil player bluffing as the Gatekeeper. They nominate, and tell town the next day that the Baron is not in play. They know a Drunk is in play, and can cast doubt on the other Outsider claim.

==== Guardian (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Guardian learns who the Demon could be, if they can predict the Demon's movements.
HOW: Consider when you give the Demon to the Guardian, as this will impact the integrity of the Guardian's information.
TIPS: You don't have access to any valuable information unless you are able to successfully pin down who the Demon targets during the night: so learning roles about town is essential to your success. If you can figure out where the high-value kills might reside, you can lean into them to hopefully catch the Demon killing them. From there, whether you receive a yes or a no, you've whittled down the list of Demon candidates. You can do this multiple times per game, meaning you'll be able to separate players into clusters of players who definitely aren't, or plausibly are the Demon, which is incredibly powerful information to have.
BLUFF: Fabricating information that sounds plausible is key to bluffing as the Guardian. Not only are you able to frame certain players as the Demon, but you can "miss" the Demon for multiple nights and get a yes - finally - between a large number of players, rendering your information plausibly true, but difficult to pin down. Moreover, you can help shape a world where a Monk protected a player, or a Mayor bounced, since the Guardian's ability only asks that you choose the same player that the Demon chose, even if they didn't die. So you can help sell bluffs at the same time as spreading misinformation!
EX: Dwayne is the Guardian, who correctly picks the player the Demon chooses on Night 4 and Night 6. Dwayne learns that the Demon is not among the players that Dwayne learned up until Night 4, but learns that the Demon is among the players learned on Night 6: as such, the Demon is one of two players. // Colin is a Minion bluffing as the Guardian. They claim, on Night 5, to have finally received a yes on a night where noone died. The Demon, bluffing Monk, sinks a kill on that night.

==== Houndmaster (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Houndmaster can sniff out where evil might reside upon their own death.
HOW: Remember that dead players also count for "steps" - don't skip!
TIPS: As would be the case with any "demon-bane" roles, consider claiming strong information roles to bait a kill at night. Unlike a Clockmaker that must track a Demon to its nearest Minion, the Houndmaster gets to select where the ping originates, and additionally, the Houndmaster may receive a zero, indicating that they've sniped an evil directly - which is great information to have. Other than that, you'll need to play the waiting game, and consider finding a role swap if possible!
BLUFF: The Houndmaster is a fantastic bluff for a Minion killed by a Vigormortis, or a Demon that can "jump" like the Imp, Fang Gu or Hypnox. Steering town towards a false ping is a great way to waste time, and kill off powerful roles by implicating them as evil. Be cautious about confirmation roles, and enjoy watching the good team eat themselves up in light of your death.
EX: Criss is the Houndmaster who dies to the Harlot's ability. Criss chooses Finn, the Oracle, and learns a 2. // Angel is the Imp who passes to their Gerrymanderer in the night. Upon waking, Angel claims that they chose Sanjay, and received a 3, pointing to the Oracle and the Fortune Teller either side.

==== Lost Lover (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Lost Lovers learn what evil they are fighting, if they can find each other in time.
HOW: Remember to mark one Lost Lover with the “First” token to ensure that you contact the same player first each night. If the good team is struggling at the moment a choice is made, and the choice is incorrect, you may consider giving partially correct information; either a correct Demon, a handful of correct Minions, or some combination inbetween.
TIPS: If you are sober and in play, you know there is another Lost Lover out there waiting for you - so find them. They may also be looking for their other half, of course, and so time is against you to seek out the right player and guess them in the night, since if either party makes their guess, that counts for both Lost Lovers. Consider waiting until there is some form of confirmation around your, or your potential partner’s identity before making a guess, and defend them as you would yourself to ensure they can be chosen at night! Your information, if true, is extremely powerful, and so you will be a priority target for the evil team.
BLUFF: This one is pretty simple: if you feel there is another Lost Lover in the game, goad them into choosing you at night to extract incorrect information. Alternatively, form a pact with a fellow evil player to “guess” them later in the game, and advocate that town keep them safe just in case. Either way, hedging your bets by claiming to be a Lost Lover can be extremely useful, as it will cause other Lost Lovers in the game to second guess their choice at night.
EX: Dan and Ann are Lost Lovers. On Night 3, Dan uses their ability and selects Ann. Dan learns that there is a Fang Gu in play. Ann wakes to learn that a Witch and a Marionette are in play. // Alex is the Vigormortis bluffing as a Lost Lover. They coax Kevin - a real Lost Lover - into selecting them at night. Kevin learns that a Xaan is in play. Maya, the other real Lost Lover, wakes to learn that an Imp is in play.

==== Martyr (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Martyr learns who would otherwise die, at the cost of their own life.
HOW: Given that if sober, the Martyr's effect must happen - just make sure you give a character, and not a player.
TIPS: Your ability is fairly straightforward, so your role boils down to when you choose to use it. If a powerful Townsfolk outs on any given day, consider using your ability to see if their claim stacks up. Or perhaps, if you see a Demon-bane role like the Ravenkeeper, you may want to announce what you saw to guide the Demon back to the player they chose. Better yet, seeing a Demon like the Imp or Hypnox means that the Demon tried to pass - so capitalise on any players with heavy suspicion on them to get them out before they're able to jump! As an additional benefit, if you believe it to be a Fang Gu game, you may well protect an Outsider from being jumped, potentially removing them as an intended target.
BLUFF: Bluffing as the Martyr isn't dissimilar to bluffing as the Ravenkeeper or something like it. However, the specificity of your information is lessened, meaning you only need to confirm a role in play, rather than a specific role a character is claiming. That said, you can consider using your Martyr bluff to confirm the existence of a Demon bluff - but beware: if you do this, it's likely that town will expect that player to die later, so ensure you have an escape hatch.
EX: Lochie is the Martyr. He chooses to use his ability on Night 3, and learns Undertaker. Lochie dies the next morning. // Jules is the Imp who star passes on Night 4. They wake in the morning, dead, and claim to be the Martyr that saw the Alchemist, implying they were targeted in the night.

==== Mime (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Mime's performances lead them to learn what is in play, and what is not.
HOW: Madness in this context should work similarly to the Pixie. While players may discern the player is in fact the Mime, so long as the Mime is continuing to adhere to madness, they should not be punished.
TIPS: Stick to the act! You will inevitably cause double claims and sow distrust in town, but your performances are for a greater good. You may consider dropping the act at some point to let players know what you are, but know that you won't receive any information that night. It's a small sacrifice, and potentially worth it if it means gaining the trust of your peers - but it may also attract the attention of the evil team.
BLUFF: Not only is bluffing as the Mime great for planting the seeds of distrust by creating double claims, but the "information" you share afterwards can even further harm town. Be judicious with what you claim isn't in play, as only so many roles cannot exist. Ensure the roles you claim not to exist are roles you want out of town, or are attached to players who have particular suspicions.
EX: Chris is the Mime who decides to pretend to be the Monk. They claim that role the following day, and learn that night that the Monk is in play. // Pauline is the Baron who is bluffing as the Mime. They pretend to be the Soldier, which they know to be in play, and claim later that the Soldier is not in play.

==== Mechanical Man (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Mechanical Man performs outrageous, risky tasks to learn valuable information.
HOW: Tasks are very much up to each individual Storyteller, but some examples might include: // Nominate a neighbour for no reason // Give X player a Mezepheles word // Claim to have heard, and announce specific information from a role in town // Hold a chat in a public room with a certain amount of people, or a certain person // Claim Minion and guess the Damsel // Provide a true piece of information in line with what a Savant might receive. Tasks - and information - should scale in risk/reward as the game progresses.
TIPS: This is an extremely versatile role that learns valuable information about the game state each night, so - do your tasks! Though some may put you in danger, arouse suspicion, or flat out compromise other players, if you’re set on receiving your info, don’t let that stop you. Of course, you always have the choice of failing to perform your task for the day, which, while sacrificing information, can lend you a lot of credibility. In instances where it’s permitted, you can even perform your tasks while informing the player(s) involved that your next action is part of your task, which will hopefully help to keep you from looking evil, but may also gain the evil team’s attention.
BLUFF: Storytellers can give outrageous requests to a Mechanical Man, so pull off unlikely acts, share Mezepheles words, nominate with abandon. so long as it’s all done under the cover of being the Mechanical Man, not only can you spread chaos around town, but your fake information can drive town towards worlds that simply don’t exist.
EX: Jaz is the Mechanical Man. They are tasked with self-nominating, claiming to be the Lleech host. They do so without revealing their task, and learn that night that one of their neighbours is the Cerenovus. // Kris is the Godfather bluffing as the Mechanical Man. He brings his Demon into a private chat for most of the day under the guise of a task. He announces the next morning that he was informed that the person he spoke with as part of his task is good.

==== Medicine Man (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Medicine Man can detect many ills, from madness to poisoning.
HOW: Remember that poisoning and drunkenness demand arbitrary information: if good is winning, consider giving poisoned or drunk players arbitrarily correct information if the Medicine Man is aware that they may be affected.
TIPS: Your ability to sniff out forms of drunkenness, poisoning or madness is invaluable to your team, so finding individuals who may be impacted means you’ll be able to verify information, explain certain behaviours, or provide an explanation for misfiring abilities. This becomes especially powerful in situations where certain statuses are permanent, like the No Dashii’s poisoning, Sweetheart drunkenness, or Mutant madness. So long as you have reason to believe that your own information is sober, you should be a valuable asset to your team.
BLUFF: As a Minion or Demon, you’ll have insight as to who is impacted by negative statuses, so you have the option of gaining trust by verifying them. However, you can also spread misinformation to get specific good players to not trust their information - which, as above in situations like No Dashii poisoning or Sweetheart drunkenness could lead the opposing team to lean into worlds that are patently false. And if you get called out on your shoddy information, you can always back into you yourself being poisoned or drunk!
EX: Brian is the Medicine Man. He learns a 1 on Night 3, suggesting that one player's information might be unreliable. // Mary is the No Dashii bluffing as the Medicine Man. She claims to have received a 0 on Night 1, meaning her neighbours can't possibly be poisoned.

==== Mentalist (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Mentalist learns about who they speak to privately.
HOW: If the Mentalist speaks with multiple players, consider giving roles that don't lead to massive confirmation chains.
TIPS: Talk, talk, talk! Your ability to extract information is moderated by who you speak to, and in what quantity. Speak with players who you have suspicion around to confirm them one by one - or hold a private chat with just one player to learn them specifically - but know that doing so will hamper your ability to gather claims and info from other players. How you play the Mentalist depends on what you hope you achieve with the role, but know that staying isolated in town will likely signal to the Demon that you're trying to gather Mentalist info.
BLUFF: If you claim to be the Mentalist, people will likely want to "test" you - so having knowledge of roles is handy. With that said, you can always use your Mentalist bluff to help confirm evil players, and legitimise their claims by suggesting that they exist when the time comes. Mixing the confirmation of bluffs with real information is a great way to lend yourself credibility, helping town infer that you might be what you state.
EX: Wei is the Mentalist who speaks with four people on the first day. At night, Wei learns that one of them is the Dentist. // Attie is the Fearmonger posing as the Mentalist. They chat with their evil team on Day 1 and claim to learn that one of those players is the Seer. They chat with a further four players the next day and claim to learn that among them is the Oracle.

==== Mortician (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Mortician adds and aids the Undertaker - and keeps an eye on deceased neighbours.
HOW: The Mortician enhances, and in a sense, protects the Undertaker, so ensure that the bag built takes this into consideration. Consider pairing the Mortician with Demons such as the Ojo, or Minions such as the Spy to ensure that the Undertaker can be sufficiently bluffed.
TIPS: As is the case with the Huntsman or Choirboy, your existence implies the existence of the Undertaker - so go and find them! Creating a chain of confirmation with such a powerful role is incredibly useful, and finding the Undertaker means that you're able to activate your ability for as long as they live. While you need to trust who you select at night, if confirmed, you can likely trust your pick until the very end.
BLUFF: Like many "pair" roles, you're often able to take two bluffs for the price of one. If you receive Undertaker as a bluff, you know that the Mortician is also up for grabs. Keep in mind that bluffing Mortician with an Undertaker in play is tricky, since there is a mechanical basis to your ability, but given how often strong roles try to hide behind the Undertaker's role, you might want to consider "choosing" them in the night to waste your ability.
EX: Gideon is the Mortician. On Night 2, he learns that one of his dead neighbours was targeted by an ability - the dead Oracle reveals on a later day that they were Cerenovus mad. Gideon also chooses Reginald as part of his ability: Reginald learns that the Demon killed the High Priestess that night. // Angela is the Poisoner bluffing as the Mortician. They claim to have selected the Ravenkeeper as their Undertaker pick, who learns nothing. Angela also notes that on the same night, the now-dead Cerenovus may have been selected at night, implying they are currently mad.

==== Old Sheriff (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Old Sheriff's eye for evil isn't what it used to be, but they still keep undesirables out of town.
HOW: Running the Old Sheriff is very simple, but do take care when removing Outsiders – you may inadvertently hamstring characters like the Godfather or Fang Gu, which rely on Outsiders to function properly.
TIPS: As the old town’s sheriff, you aren’t quite what you used to be, but you still do a fine enough job of keeping the order. Although learning how many evil players sit near you is valuable information, remember that this number may be either one higher or lower than it should be. Take that into account when relaying this information, but of course, if the number you receive is incredibly high, aside from being poisoned or drunk, you can reliably assume that at least someone near you is evil. Thankfully, your ability to curb Outsiders means that the majority of your job is already done at the start of the game, so even if your ability can’t be fully relied upon, at least you’ve done your job as best you can.
BLUFF: The Old Sheriff works best with Minions that might remove Outsiders, since it mimics his own setup ability. With that said, if you’re confident there is a Drunk in play, you can get away with bluffing as the Old Sheriff to ensure that town affords their information far more certainty than they probably should. Additionally, the number you provide can be kept nice and low to protect any nearby evil players; or raise it sky-high to implicate some of your neighbours.
EX: Zach is the Old Sheriff. He learns that there are 2 evils within 3 steps of him; the actual number is 1. // Justin is the Baron bluffing as the Old Sheriff. He suggests there are 0 evils within 3 steps of him, despite the fact that he neighbours the Demon and the Poisoner.

==== Prophet (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Prophet sees into the future to learn about the player about to be executed that day.
HOW: As with the Gossip, players can’t prophecise about things that are yet to happen: the prophecy is true or false at the time that it is made, and can only be confirmed via the game state at that moment.
TIPS: You have the ability to confirm players in whatever way you wish, so make the most of your prophecies. You may want to keep it quite general, ie. “Player X is good”, or perhaps be more specific, ie. “Player Y is either the Gatekeeper or the Dreamer”. Whatever you choose to go with, receiving confirmation from the Storyteller will help your team solve the game, and sometimes, learning that your prophecy is false can lead to other conclusions – so don’t fret if you don’t get the answer you’re after.
BLUFF: Given that you know who the evil players are around the Grimoire, you’ll be much better equipped to make plausible-sounding prophecies. Although you can’t receive confirmation around what you say, you can bluff it to either clear recently executed teammates, or to implicate others. Take care that the misinformation you spread isn’t disproven elsewhere.
EX: Freddie is the Prophet. He publicly claims that today's executee is an Outsider. He learns at night that it was true. // Angel is the Spy bluffing as the Prophet. She publicly claims that today's executee - next to the Monk and the Plague Doctor - neighbours an evil player, and states that the next day that it was true.

==== Ronin (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Ronin becomes unstoppable when their charge has been slain.
HOW: Balance the Ronin's effect around the relative 'strength' of the learned players: if evil is in a strong position from the start of the game, the Ronin might learn a character unlikely to die to the Demon, and vice versa. // In a Vortox game, or if the Ronin is poisoned, the Ronin must - or might - learn a different player to the one you mark.
TIPS: Protect your learned players at all costs... during the day! When it's the Demon's time to act, if your learned player dies to the Demon, you now have the ability to defy death, with an evil player in your sights.
BLUFF: Your charge is the basis of your ability, so keeping them alive during the day is key. As such, you can tie yourself to a player that you want - or need - to protect, such as a Minion or Demon. And if that player is, for instance, a star-passing Imp, or a Fang Gu that jumps to an Outsider, you can always claim to be poisoned in some fashion, hence why your ability isn't firing... or, alternatively, on a night of two kills, imply that a Godfather or Assassin did the job instead. It's risky, but it can certainly be done.
EX: Lili is the Ronin. They learn Jake - the Librarian - and Mark - the Godfather - on Night 1. On Night 4, Jake is killed by the Demon: Lili gains their ability from then on. // Mike is the Assassin bluffing as the Ronin. Their "charge" is the Fang Gu. The Fang Gu signals that they will jump on Night 3. The new Fang Gu kills a corpse the next night, implying that Mike was targeted.

==== Seer (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Seer forces the Demon to confirm who is good, but if ever found, knows they are on borrowed time.
HOW: If the Seer is ever Drunk or poisoned, you are still obligated to wake the Demon to choose a player, however the Seer will learn arbitrary information. If the Seer is chosen while drunk or poisoned, the Demon does not learn who the Seer is.
TIPS: Stay alive! Your survival is your best chance to gain solid information about trustworthy players around the Grimoire. Knowing that the Demon is actively hunting for you means that arousing as little suspicion as possible is paramount. And, of course, if you ever learn your own name, you know that the Demon now knows precisely who you are - and will likely target you at the next possible opportunity. Call their bluff, reveal your information, and hope that town trusts you.
BLUFF: Simply put, if you are evil, it is highly likely that you know who the good players around the Grimoire are - use this to your advantage and curry their favour by signalling to them that the Demon chose them in the night, and that you learned their name - and sprinkle in some trusted evil players for good measure. Just remember that it’s difficult to bluff as the Seer in the long term given that the Demon should eventually find you.
EX: Alice is the Seer. They learn three names before learning themselves on Night 4. They know they have been found, and die on Night 5. // TJ is the Cerenovus bluffing as the Seer. They "confirm" their Demon, claim to learn their own name, and are then killed by the Vigor Mortis the night after.

==== Shinkan (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Shinkan punishes evil for killing them by dulling their powers.
HOW: Remember that the Shinkan's ability, if active, lasts for the next day and night. The evil team is not drunk on the night the Shinkan dies, so any other effects that night work as intended.
TIPS: As would be the case with any "demon-bane" roles, consider claiming strong information roles to bait a kill at night. Evidence of your existence is largely provable, especially with "loud" Minions and Demons such as the Al Hadikhia, Arbiter or Vizier: if their abilities don't work, then you did! As such, you are reasonably well confirmed, as well as having been a boon to the good team.
BLUFF: Bluffing as the Shinkan does require some level of "sacrifice" on your team's behalf, as it will require them to act inactive. A Poisoner poisoning a dead body, a Fearmonger not changing their pick, the Cerenovus self-maddening, etc. Additionally, the Demon has to not kill on the corresponding night. However, this is an extremely powerful bluff, as there is some degree of mechanical confirmation around the Shinkan's ability, so simulating it in full lends a lot of credence to the bluff.
EX: Maddie is the Shinkan. They die on Night 3. The next day, the Psychopath attempts to kill the Empath, and it fails. The Psychopath is executed that same day. // Kamilla is the Hypnox claiming to be the Shinkan. They select themselves on Night 2. On Day 3, they inform their team and they coordinate a night and day of no evil impact.

==== Sleeper (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Sleeper goes deep into enemy lines, posing as a Minion in order to nullify an evil player's ability.
HOW: This is a fairly dynamic character with a lot of fun interactions: the initial decision to make a Minion drunk impacts game balance, so consider having the Sleeper register as a Minion to give town reasons to push them out of the game, or out themselves.
TIPS: For as long as you are alive, you can be assured that while sober, an in play Minion is unable to function as intended. This should provide some assurance that, even though you aren’t able to out your role, you are providing a benefit to town, even if that puts you at risk. This is not information you can out to town freely, but if you are suspected of being a Minion yourself, you may consider outing your information and trying to take a Minion with you in the process. The Storyteller may not grant your wish, but at least you tried, no?
BLUFF: If you are a Minion bluffing as the Sleeper, it’s crucial that you abide by the rules of the character and stay quiet about a Sleeper being in play: not dying when revealing your role might give the game away! That said, having a Minion “malfunction” might sell a world where you really exist, and may curry the town’s favour, even if they won’t want to push on the how or why. Then, when the time is right, you can spring to life and cause terror in town. You may now be outed as an evil player, but in a diminished town that can’t afford to waste time getting rid of you.
EX: Ethan is the Sleeper. The Poisoner is told that they are made drunk, but neither state as much to their respective teammates. Ethan dies on Night 3 and the Poisoner regains their ability. // Josh is the Imp bluffing as the Sleeper. Josh suggests that they believe the Marionette - which is not in play - has been "slept", and therefore the Demon wouldn't know who they are, leading good players to question their alignment.

==== Smith (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Smith creates their own tools.
HOW: As with the Wizard, the Smith's ability should be within the bounds of what would be considered fun and solvable. Use your discussion with the Smith to mediate this. Remember to wake the Smith and a point in the night appropriate to their ability, if at all. // Aim to steer away from abilities that are mechanically confirming in most cases, since they are often impossible to bluff by the evil team, but also confirm the Smith is what they claim. // While moderating an ability on the spot is difficult, consider aiming for something less powerful than what an Amnesiac might receive, given the distinct downside of the Amnesiac not knowing the ability they have.
TIPS: Unlike the Amnesiac, who has to figure out what their Storyteller-given ability is, you know right from the jump, because you create it yourself! Get creative, make up abilities that have never been seen before, or pick an off-script role to mimic. Remember that the Demon gains a clue as to what your ability might be, so information that you gain, or effects your ability might trigger can be easily discerned by the evil team, or worse, copied, so be judicious.
BLUFF: Evil roles have a lot of overlap with what a Smith might learn, so craft an ability that sounds plausible in order to prove yourself to be real. If you have a Devil's Advocate, consider an ability that can protect. If you have a Poisoner, perhaps your ability learns powerful information at the expense of "drunking" players each night. Or if you have a Godfather, perhaps you can claim to have a power that can kill at night if an evil player dies during the day! You have far more mechanically confirmable abilities at your disposal than most good players, so bluffing as the Smith gives you free reign to reverse engineer tools at your disposal to fit the role.
EX: Eric is the Smith. On Night 1, he proposes to gain the ability to learn characters killed by the Demon each night. The Storyteller agrees to this ability, and wakes the Demon to let them know that the Smith's ability learns about Demon kills. // TJ is the Fang Gu with the Boffin Gossip ability. They gossip a true statement during the day, but claim they are in fact the Smith, who gains the ability to kill during the night if a player who is drunk or poisoned is executed during the day. Fun!

==== Swindler (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Swindler steals a copy of another good player's information, but corrupts it in the process.
HOW: The Swindler’s power can be moderated on the basis of how well town is doing. If they are doing well, consider picking a character whose information is difficult to immediately parse, and vice versa. It may also be worth including evil players in the three that are ‘seen’ by the Swindler, as they may be inclined to share the information they received. If there are no remaining information roles in play, the Swindler’s power simply fails - but this in itself is also useful information. // Be sparing with first night roles: corrupting their information can be harmful to town, but puzzling out the correct information can ultimately be helpful.
TIPS: Your job as the Swindler is to confirm another player around the Grimoire. The cost, of course, is that you corrupt the information that Townsfolk receives, so there is some wisdom, perhaps, in calling out your role once used to see if you can determine where that information came from. Some information, like the Dreamer’s, is quite obvious, while others are much broader or general, so the difficulty in figuring out the source varies. With that said, the ability to confirm another player outside of the first day is extremely powerful, and the understanding that the information is necessarily wrong (rather than poisoned) means you can potentially puzzle out a correct answer along with your swindled ally. There is even an argument to make your discussion extremely obvious, since if you manage to gather the information of a spent role such as a Seamstress, you can goad the Demon into killing them under the impression that they may be something ongoing.
BLUFF: As a confirmation role, this is a really powerful bluff for the evil team. Given that the information received by the Swindler is wrong, you don’t need to lean too heavily on your knowledge of the town to ensure that your role is legitimised. Use your ‘ability’, confirm a team-mate - be they the Demon or a Minion who will likely become the Demon - and don’t put up a fight if you’re nominated. You are, after all, a spent role!
EX: Scott is the Swindler. He uses his ability at night, receiving a yes. The three players he receives are the Fortune Teller, who received a no; the Flowergirl, who received a yes; and the Town Crier, who also received a yes. // Kevin is the Poisoner bluffing as the Swindler. He poisons the Oracle overnight, and claims to receive what he believes to be an incorrect Oracle number. The three players he claims to receive are the Oracle, the Chambermaid, and the Artist.

==== Thaumaturge (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Thaumaturge can turn a Minion's powers back against them.
HOW: You can moderate the Thaumaturge’s impact on the game by who you provide in the ping if a Minion is successfully bounced. If the Thaumaturge’s team needs some assistance, consider framing the same two people frequently, and if evil team is doing poorly, spreading around the wrong ping will help pin down the source.
TIPS: Finding prime targets for Minion abilities will enable you to get the best value out of your role. As characters like the Monk protect certain characters from the Demon, your job is to protect characters from the Minion, with the bonus that a “bounced” ability will cause interesting, unintended consequences. And, of course, if no good targets present themselves, you can always target yourself. Once your ability is triggered, the evil team will be on your trail, and the chance of being found out increases, so get as much value out of your ability as possible.
BLUFF: If you’re a Minion that has an ability that targets other players, you can bluff as the Thaumaturge to frame other players: pick unusual targets to simulate a bounce, and claim you targeted other, more obvious targets. Keep in mind, of course, that if the player you frame is executed, you’ll need to figure out a way forward with your ability still intact - but if you’re expendable, consider requesting that your Demon take you out of play to sell the lie.
EX: Steven is the Thaumaturge who chooses the Cannibal. The Cerenovus also chooses the Cannibal at night, making themselves mad in the process. The Cerenovus learns that Steven and one other player is the Thaumaturge. // Amy is the Godfather bluffing as the Thaumaturge. They kill the Sage at night, claiming to have selected the Devil's Advocate. Despite further Outsider deaths at night, there are no extra night deaths. Amy suggests that the Sage may have been the Godfather whose kill bounced via the Thaumaturge's ability.

==== Wire Tapper (townsfolk)
LEDE: The Wire Tapper corrupts lines of communication, mixing up their Demon bluffs - or not.
HOW: Select an in-play role as you would an out-of-play role as the Demon’s corrupted bluff; however take some care when selecting the player to drunk as a result of the Wire Tapper’s power; choosing the ‘wrong’ person may have unintended consequences for the game, and more importantly, render some roles like ‘you start knowing’ roles redundant without any interference from another player such as the Poisoner. Consider drunkening ongoing information roles, something that might cause some drama early on, or - if the game state heavily favours evil - someone who isn’t impacted by it at all.
TIPS: This is a Townsfolk with a binary choice on the first night, but it is an incredibly powerful one! Whether you use your ability or not, the Demon learns that you exist, and so you may choose to use it to toss an in-play role into their bluffs, or decline to ensure town stays as sober as possible. But no matter what you choose to do, the Demon cannot be 100% certain that their bluffs will hold! Use this to your advantage and either claim to be the Wire Tapper early, or perhaps hold on to it and sniff out any double claims; they may just be evil in (a poor) disguise.
BLUFF: Given the Wire Tapper’s ability, this is an easy role to bluff, but sadly your utility only goes as far as the first day. If you are a powerful Minion with a ‘spent’ teammate such as the Baron, you may consider asking them to fall into a double claim to legitimise yourself, and gain trust with town which can keep you alive and operational. Just know that a Wire Tapper who is reluctant to be fed to the Vortox, for instance, may not be terribly trustworthy.
EX: Lavender is the Wire Tapper who chooses to use their ability. The Demon receives three roles - the Mechanical Man, the Evangelist, and the Slayer - one of which is an in-play role. // Jessie is the Boffin bluffing as the Wire Tapper. They have given their Demon the Librarian's ability, and are fed to the Vortox that afternoon. Such is life. However, the two players claiming Fortune Teller - one the real Fortune Teller, the other the Pixie, are pushed on by town for a double claim, potentially due to the Wire Tapper's ability.

==== Barfly (outsider)
LEDE: The Barfly socialises immediately to learn who's who, with dire consequences if they don't get it quite right.
HOW: Use the Barfly's drunkening the same way you might a Sweetheart's. Remember that characters like the Recluse and Spy might misregister.
TIPS: Under construction!
BLUFF: Under construction!
EX: Will is the Barfly. On Day 1, he guesses 5 players' roles, getting 2 correct. The Artist, as a result, is immediately drunk. // Hugo is the Godfather bluffing as the Barfly. On Day 1, he guesses members of his evil team among his 5 players, and the Mathematician learns a 0 overnight.

==== Blasphemer (outsider)
LEDE: The Blasphemer turns a welcome Townsfolk to a reviled Outsider, but might discover hidden evil in the process.
HOW: Make sure you mark the Blasphemer’s first conversation with a Townsfolk, and keep that reminder token in play until the Blasphemer’s death. Remember that the Blasphemer’s ability doesn’t affect Outsiders, Minions or Demons.
TIPS: You know how your ability operates, and so there is a valid fear that you may turn a valuable Townsfolk into a potentially detrimental Outsider when you die. As such, track your conversations and warn whoever you speak to from the outset of the game that they are now burdened with your ability. Of course, the upside is that if the player you warn doesn’t turn into an Outsider, but someone reports being turned instead, you can be reasonably assured that your first conversation was with an evil player, or a Drunk! Though you’ve negatively impacted your team, you now have a piece of valuable information that will help solve the game. // Given your unique situation, you may choose to only interact with confirmed Outsiders, or people who are willing to risk being turned. The obvious downside is that your information will be (mostly) second hand, and it will be difficult to gain an understanding in the same way that other players might, but at the same time, you help to confirm those players upon your death. If possible, you may also want to consider killing the Blasphemer on a day when their ability is misfiring: if you discover that they are poisoned or drunk in some way, whether by a Minstrel, Courtier, or Minion ability, take that opportunity to safely dispatch the Blasphemer. Of course, there is also the option of simply not engaging in any private conversations, but that carries its own downside: how you choose to play the Blasphemer, then, is up to you.
BLUFF: If you have a Pit Hag, consider changing a Townsfolk into an Outsider when a high-value Townsfolk dies. This may cast doubt on that player’s information, and may also help to steer people away from believing that a Pit Hag is in play. Additionally, if you know the Outsider count is high, turning someone into the Blasphemer ensures an additional death at night. // If you choose to play as the Blasphemer yourself, consider "outing" to someone trustworthy and let them know of your situation. This may make town reluctant to kill you, lest they lose access to a powerful Townsfolk role, and may also give your team information about precisely who you’ve chosen to target. You can also claim, perhaps, that your Demon will be transformed into an Outsider, which may carry its own negatives.
EX: Gul is the Blasphemer. He speaks with two players on the first day. The second player Gul speaks to, upon their death, turns into the Saint. The first player that Gul spoke to is the Drunk or evil. // Ben is the Godfather claiming to be the Blasphemer. He speaks with his Demon on Day 1, and later claims, upon his execution, that the Demon has become the Plague Doctor.

==== Colossus (outsider)
LEDE: The Colossus is so large they cover their neighbours, making them look like the Colossus too - for better or worse.
HOW: Be judicious with misregistration when it comes to the Colossus. Its ability can be extremely detrimental to town, so turning it off when necessary, or simply allowing the Colossus to die if executed, can ensure games remain in balance. Remember that while neighbours of the Colossus may register as the Colossus, they don't have its ability: so if they are executed, unless otherwise stated, they die as normal. // Characters that rely on Outsiders as part of their ability, such as the No Dashii or Godfather, should interact with the Colossus, but again, use discretion so as not to tip the game too far in evil's favour.
TIPS: The hulking Colossus is so large it can cause its neighbours to register as the Colossus as well. If you think it's safe, let them know. But understand that trust in your neighbours can only go so far. Given that you are an Outsider, and your neighbours may register as the same, they are prime targets for a Fang Gu, Godfather, or any other evil that interacts with Outsiders. Are you covering for evil by having them register as a good Colossus? Are you causing No Dashii poisoning to spread farther than it reasonably could? Or are you doing nothing at all? It's hard to say, but information around town should feel a little "off" with you around. Try to pinpoint how, and why, to help solve the game. If you're convinced it's safe to do so, consider requesting execution to lift the veil from your neighbours.
BLUFF: While this may be tricky without characters like the Devil's Advocate or Lleech in play, you can certainly bluff as the Colossus by playing around its strengths, in terms of how it can aid the evil team. Convincing town that you are the Colossus may mean that your neighbours draw undue suspicion, as your "ability" may be covering them. Poisoning confirmation roles like the Undertaker upon the execution of your neighbours can help to give you the social credit that you need to operate, so evaluate the tools at your disposal, and make them work if you can.
EX: Jack is the Colossus. His neighbours are the Baron and the Empath. The Baron registers as a good Colossus until Jack's death, causing the Tea Lady next to the Baron to believe that they are confirmed as good. // Emily is the Lleech claiming to be the Colossus. She is executed on Day 2 and does not die. She has Lleech hosted the Dreamer, who sees Emily's neighbour as the Colossus or the Wraith, and Emily's other neighbour as the Colossus or the Harpy.

==== Eccentric (outsider)
LEDE: The Eccentric's unique token means its presence is known to many, but mentioned by none.
HOW: In order to run this character online, you must include the Gardener Loric. On Night 1, before passing out tokens, wake each player clockwise and let them know the Eccentric's token is, or is not in the bag, and ask whether they wish to take the token if so.
TIPS: Congratulations on being brave (or silly) enough to take the Eccentric's token! Its unique shape in the bag means that anyone who drew a character before you knows you're in play, and anyone after you doesn't. Of course, no-one will be able to say so, because to do so risks an early exit, so play it cool, give nothing away until you're dead, and let town tie itself in knots to work out whether you're real or not. // Speaking of death, aside from dying at night, you'll need to contend with nominations; the Eccentric must be nominated and executed by a good player, else they risk losing the game for their team, so if you've been framed, make sure the people pushing on you are backed up with information confirming them as good. If not, it's time to fight like hell to clear your name, because you're only a few votes away from an early loss. // On the upside, if you die by execution and the game continues, you can be reasonably certain your nominator is good, so speak with them and let them know!
BLUFF: While not impossible, the Eccentric's square token gives away its presence readily. But don't fret: if you're the first to take a token, don't feel the Eccentric in the bag, and draw an evil token, you've got a guaranteed bluff ready to go. Just be sure that the Outsider count checks out, and that you're prepared for what comes when someone invokes your name and doesn't die. It's a "might", after all. // Play it as you would if good, be prepared to be framed, and if it's time to go, insist that a teammate be the one to nominate you to help sell them as good. Insist that you live on days you're nominated by players you wish to frame, but don't let them know why! If you've got a Witch or Harpy handy, it may be worth coordinating your actions to "confirm" your role.
EX: Zoe is the fourth player to take tokens this game, and decides to take the Eccentric's token. Three people know the Eccentric is in play other than Zoe, so Zoe double claims one of them to infer, without alluding to her real role, that she may be the Eccentric. // Yang is the first player to take tokens this game, and does not feel the Eccentric's token in the bag. They grab a token, receiving the Witch. They curse the town's Savant, and heavily imply they are the Eccentric. The Savant believes Yang is the Eccentric and mistakenly mentions it: they nominate Yang, and die.

==== Egotist (outsider)
LEDE: The Egotist drunks and befuddles those who would dare to nominate them.
HOW: Evil players can also be made drunk via the Egotist's ability. Make sure to mark players as drunk immediately after the nomination commences in case they are a waking ability like the Slayer, Artist, etc. // As with the Butler or Golem, there is no penalty per se to self-nominating, but remind the Egotist that they cannot to ensure it doesn't happen again.
TIPS: As an Outsider, it's likely you'll want out of town, and quickly - but your ability means that you are a liability. If you're nominated, it may be worth trying to rally votes to ensure the damage you deal is as little as possible, but let town know of the damage nonetheless. If possible, try to rally Outsiders to vote on your execution, and hope that evil players join in, or ask spent roles that don't mind being made drunk to stack on the votes. This should mitigate the worst of your ability, and ensure town's information is as sound as possible.
BLUFF: Bluffing as the Egotist, while possible, is difficult, because you run the risk of town wanting you out ASAP. With that said, the threat of being made drunk might be enough to persuade people not to nominate or vote on your execution. If you have a Poisoner or Lady Lace in your arsenal, you can simulate the Egotist's ability by poisoning a player that was involved in a claimed Egotist vote. So let your bluff be your shield that protects you from execution!
EX: Andre is the Egotist. The Artist nominates them on Day 1. They are immediately drunk, and their Artist question yields arbitrary information later in the day. // Violet is the Poisoner bluffing as the Egotist. They are nominated by the Clockmaker, and the claimed Fortune Teller votes on their execution. After surviving, at night, Violet poisons the Fortune Teller.

==== Fixer (outsider)
LEDE: The Fixer places their bets and wins no matter what - or else.
HOW: Remember to change the Fixer's alignment to that of the winning team, should the Fixer meet its criteria.
TIPS: Like the Politician, you get to choose which side you play for - but unlike the Politician, who can change on a dime depending on which team is winning, the Fixer has to make their choice at the start of the game. So don't back down from defending your chosen players, and make sure at least two of them make it to the very end. If one dies along the way, it's no big deal, but given that you might die at any time, you'll ultimately be a thorn in the good team's side, as it will cause confusion as to what may have caused your exit. All is not lost should your chosen players not quite make it, since, as a good player, you still adhere to the same win conditions as the good team. You have two shots at winning, which is great - it just may not be entirely helpful, especially if you've accidentally chosen an all evil trio!
BLUFF: Are you feeling called out for defending players who may not necessarily gel with town's information? No problem! You're the Fixer - and you're just playing to your ability. The Fixer gives evil players a viable reason for taking certain positions on certain players, which means you can vote irregularly, nominate players outside of your "chosen three", and generally be a nuisance to the good team. Consider including a good player among the three just for credibility, as you don't want to point directly to your team - but also note that should any of them die, you'll be expected to die suddenly as well. Don't worry, you say, it's just a "might".
EX: David is the Fixer. He selects the Washerwoman, Shabaloth and Colossus on Night 1. The Washerwoman is executed on the first day, and David dies along with that night's kill on Night 4. The Shabaloth and Colossus ultimately make it to the final 3, and David doesn't care what happens next, because no matter who wins, David wins. // Isabella is the Godfather bluffing as the Fixer. She takes up a staunch defense of the Fang Gu, the Drunk, and the Pacifist. The Drunk is executed on Day 3, and Isabella chooses herself with her ability, suggesting she died to the Fixer's ability, and not the Godfather's.

==== Missionary (outsider)
LEDE: The Missionary risks death if they nominate without the permission of the person they are nominating.
HOW: Note that the Missionary is not prone to death unless they specifically nominate a player without asking permission, or if permission is not granted. Consider not killing them in case there is suspicion around them, else you risk confirming them.
TIPS: Always say please and thank you. // You may want to nominate without permission in order to confirm your identity, as a Mutant might, but this isn't a guarantee, so just be nice. It takes more muscles to frown than it does to smile.
BLUFF: No, seriously, always say please and thank you. // This is a straightforward bluff, in that you simply have to follow the golden rule of the Missionary. If you do, there is little reason for town to suspect you - but if there is an opportunity for a double kill, you may want to consider nominating out of turn to confirm yourself, assuming you are expendable at that point in the game.
EX: Sarah is the Missionary. They request permission from the Mayor before nominating, and the Mayor says no. The Missionary nominates them anyway, and they die during the night. // Sean is the Assassin bluffing as the Missionary. They nominate the Fortune Teller without asking permission. That night, the Assassin selects themselves, resulting in two deaths overnight.

==== Oaf (outsider)
LEDE: The Oaf's clumsy nature causes misinformation to spread, and might one day kill them.
HOW: This is an Outsider ability, and thus should be harmful to town. Only bounce abilities should it be beneficial to the evil team - though you can always temper the potency of this effect by targeting the Oaf instead. This is a useful tool if evil is doing particularly well. You may also do this if doing otherwise would risk confirmation of other players.
TIPS: Let your neighbours know they're in for a rough ride! As the Oaf, you are liable to have abilities bounce off you, meaning that there is a possibility for errant information to spread from Fortune Tellers, Dreamers, or even Minions. The only upside is that once targeted enough, the Oaf simply can't take it anymore and dies in the night. This may serve as some measure of confirmation, but unfortunately you've accelerated the game, and not in a good way. // You can engineer your ability such that by learning about your neighbours, you can ask Townsfolk to target you with their abilities, burning up your own ability and ensuring that information is (reasonably) reliable. No guarantees, of course. // You also have the benefit of being a fairly confirmable Outsider: there aren’t many ways you can cause an extra death at night, but of course, if you’ve been too public about your role, you can always be targeted and killed in the same night - so be judicious with who you tell. // And if a Gambler ever asks to pick you in the night, or if a Golem asks to nominate you, or if a Moonchild wants to point at you… no thanks.
BLUFF: As with a role like the Tinker, bluffing as the Oaf is easy, right up until it’s not. People will begin to question why you are still alive, especially if you’ve been targeted by multiple abilities, but if you’re a Minion who can afford to be caught out, this isn’t so bad - but planning your escape route ensures the information you’ve “corrupted” remains relevant to your neighbours instead. Consider covering your tracks with other Minions like the Godfather or Assassin, or Demons like the Polterghast or Zombuul! // Unlike the Tinker who can die at any time per the Storyteller’s discretion, there is a hard cap on how many times an Oaf can impact the game before they’re spent, so keep track of who is targeting you, and do your best to frame your neighbours that way. // If you think an Oaf is in play, why not kill them early on a night when you have a second kill to spare? Doing so will imply that the Oaf has bounced far more than previously believed, causing other players to doubt their information if nearby.
EX: Tom is the Oaf. He is targeted by the Fortune Teller along with another player, and it bounces to a neighbour: the Red Herring. The same night, Tom is targeted by the Cerenovus, causing Tom's other neighbour to be made mad. The night after, Tom is chosen by the Monk: the Monk protection does not bounce, but Tom dies anyway. // Bert is the Imp bluffing as the Oaf. On a night after an Outsider was executed, they pass to their Scarlet Woman, and the Godfather kills another player.

==== Record Keeper (outsider)
LEDE: The Record Keeper carries the Grimoire wherever they go, and doesn't want it to fall into the wrong hands.
HOW: Remember to show the Grimoire to the Demon at the appropriate point in the night order so that information is provided per what the Demon would see when the Record Keeper is up in the night order.
TIPS: Stay alive! Although you start with knowledge about the game, be careful about who you share that information with, or simply use it to sniff out trusted allies: your death can have disastrous consequences for the good team. Consider bluffing a powerful role in order to ensure the Demon kills you at night – especially if it’s one you learn. But take care not to accidentally find yourself on the wrong end of a double claim, as this might lead to your execution.
BLUFF: No Record Keeper ever wants their wares to fall into the wrong hands via execution, so act like it. Putting you on the block is a terrible idea! Like the Saint, you can push for a world where you must stay alive, and ask that town leaves it to the Demon to dispatch you. As such, you can avoid execution day after day and find yourself alive and healthy when it counts. Consider coordinating with fellow Minions like the Godfather, or lean into confirming other bluffs in order to fill out your known roles. You may even out which Demon is in play to lend yourself further credibility.
EX: Rhona is the Record Keeper. Rhona is executed on Day 4, and the Demon sees the Grimoire that night. // Minh is the Vortox bluffing as the Record Keeper. Minh is never executed. Great job, Minh.

==== Snoop (outsider)
LEDE: The Snoop sees one of its neighbours, but gives the Demon a look as well.
HOW: The Snoop is an Outsider, so consider giving them the less powerful of the two available roles, opting to provide the Demon with the more powerful one. // Additionally, if the Snoop neighbours an evil player, ensure that the role you give is in fact one of the bluffs - or, if possible, an out-of-play role entirely, to give that Minion or Demon something extra to bluff.
TIPS: It's not often that an Outsider gets information, but sadly, your sneaky ways have let the Demon in on a few secrets of their own. Consider trying to confirm the neighbour you see, as that can form a powerful confirmation chain, but remember that evil players will be seen as good roles regardless - so while you may be confirming a good player, you may instead be giving a free bluff to an evil player! There's nothing wrong with withholding your information, but as a courtesy, it might be useful to let your other neighbour know that the Demon knows precisely who they are.
BLUFF: Want to coax a hard claim out of a neighbour? Bluffing as the Snoop might be just the thing! Telling a neighbour that they've been "seen" by the Demon might push them to claim their role and even out themselves to town, making them a prime target at night, as long as they're telling the truth. Consider trying to confirm your other neighbour as soon as is reasonable, since people may doubt you are what you claim if you're unable to produce a role in a timely fashion. // Alternatively, you may want to confront a neighbour with a role you know they aren't, in an effort to frame them as evil. They know you're either poisoned or lying, but who's to say who's correct?
EX: Maggie is the Snoop. On Night 1, she sees that one of her neighbours is the Artist. The Demon has seen that Maggie's other neighbour is the Fortune Teller. Maggie confronts her neighbour with this information, and offers her condolences to her other neighbour. Sorry about that. // Cal is the Boffin bluffing as the Snoop. He immediately informs one of his neighbours that the Demon has seen them, and they out to Cal as the Slayer. They pressure the Slayer into shooting that day, ultimately wasting their shot, since the Demon is primed to kill them that night.

==== Stowaway (outsider)
LEDE: The Stowaway sows discord among Outsiders by claiming to be one of them.
HOW: Consider giving the Stowaway to Outsiders who can “fail” to operate in some fashion in order to assist the town in figuring out who the Stowaway actually is.
TIPS: Like the Drunk, you won’t know you’re the Stowaway, and will need to find it out via gameplay. This may be impossible depending on the role you receive, but rest assured that for the most part, while your ability won’t impact the game, nor will it detract: meaning that if you’re a role like the Damsel, Recluse or Saint, the downside of your ability doesn’t apply. So hey, there’s that. Moreover, if you have some way of confirming you are the Stowaway, you can play as an outed Damsel, and see if any evil players take the bait!
BLUFF: Bluffing as a Stowaway isn’t terribly different to bluffing as a Drunk. Your claim may need to be backed up by a Librarian, so if you’re either lucky enough to be a Minion in a Librarian ping, or have Librarian in the pocket as a bluff, you can use it to sell a world where a Stowaway exists. Bluffing as an Outsider whose power can fail publicly, like the Moonchild, can definitely assist in selling your real role as the Stowaway. If you have a source of poisoning, you may also be able to sell that the Stowaway is in play by poisoning an Outsider at the point they are meant to trigger.
EX: Claire is the Stowaway, but they think they are the Saint. They are executed on Night 5, but the game does not end. Oops. // Jon is the Baron claiming to be the Saint, even though there is a Saint in play. Jon claims to have been seen as the Saint by a Ravenkeeper, and town executes the real Saint. Oops.

==== Thrall (outsider)
LEDE: The Thrall must carry out its master's bidding, lest it strengthen the evil team.
HOW: Make sure to moderate the task a Minion gives to ensure that it is passable, and within the spirit of the game. Putting the Thrall in an unwinnable situation, or one that might cause awkwardness for other players is never the way to go.
TIPS: Oh dear. As the Thrall, you have the unfortunate honour of carrying out a task handed to you by your master - a Minion. It's likely that a Minion will send you this task early, but they can always hold on to it until later. You can always try to get yourself executed before you're tasked to carry out your master's will, but this may be equally attractive to a Godfather, so consider your options. Just hope that you're dead by the time your Minion wants to give you a task. // Once your task has been handed to you, remember that death isn't an escape: you have exactly one day to complete your task to the Storyteller's satisfaction, so taking the easy out of requesting execution won't do it.
BLUFF: Simply put, bluffing as the Thrall allows you to play outed evil, if only for a day. Anything outrageous you might do to sow chaos or just spread misinformation can be reliably covered by claiming to be the Thrall later. It's possible the good team may simply leave you alone afterwards. You may even want to consider spreading true information about the game state under the presumption that because it's being stated by a Thrall, it must be false. How you bluff this role is up to you, really. // If you are a Minion who has received a Thrall, tasks might include prompting another player to say the Mezepheles' word while you sit in town, nominating and sincerely accusing a powerful Townsfolk, or asking the Thrall to pass false information about the evil team to another good player, framing them. And if the good team has cottoned on to this strategy, why not simply ask the Thrall to provide another member of the evil team with a number of claims from town to an actual evil player? No-one will believe them anyway, right?
EX: Lee is the Thrall. On Night 2, they are tasked with asking a certain player: "Who wrote Hamlet?" - that player answers "Shakespeare", which is the Mezepheles' word. // Drew is the Goblin bluffing as the Thrall. On Day 3, they out the Ravenkeeper publicly and claim to be the Goblin. On Day 4, they note that this was simply their Thrall task, which they thankfully succeeded!

==== Yang (outsider)
LEDE: The Yang is part of a delicate dance with the Yin, protecting, drunkening, but never outing, always waiting to turn evil.
HOW: Use discretion if the Yang outs their role. Players who out themselves as the Yang may be doing so to ensure they are executed (and therefore no longer in play). If there is a Yin in play, keeping them alive in this way ensures that the Yin is aware that they exist, and provides a sizeable advantage to the evil team. Similarly, this opens avenues for other players to “claim” to be the Yang and not die, which in turn may cause the Yin to second guess who their partner is.
TIPS: You are an Outsider that can never claim to be an Outsider. As such, you’ll need to come up with a convincing bluff, and potentially sell that bluff the entire game. Claiming to be the Yang, or any Outsider at any point may lead to your execution, even if you are dead, so be very careful about what you say, and to whom. Your protection role is double-edged: on one hand, players you select can’t die at night, but they are also drunk. You can’t inform them of this, but it may be useful to suggest that chosen players need to question their information, or not bank on specific abilities working as intended. // As an evil Yang, your role doesn’t change much, however now that you know your Yin, you can coordinate your actions and be an effective force for evil, setting up frames, poisoning information, and generally causing trouble around town. // Crucially, as the Yang, be prepared at any time to become the dreaded Yin-Yang: if you do, you’ll become known to the Yin, and can push towards the end game - so don’t arouse suspicion, and be aware that you could become a prime target for execution later on.
BLUFF: Never claim to be the Yang! The nature of the character is such that you would never want to alert people to your real role, so play cautiously, and offer reasons as to any double claims or misaligned information.
EX: Belle is the Yang. They are executed on Day 1 but do not die. They claim to be the Soldier, the Pacifist, the Devil's Advocate, anything - just not the Yang. // Iris is the Devil's Advocate. They don't claim to be the Yang, ever. Everyone stops asking questions they don't want the answer to.

==== Arbiter (minion)
LEDE: The Arbiter makes rules good players need to follow the next day, and punishes those who break them.
HOW: As with a Wizard wish, be sure to moderate the rules the Arbiter creates so that they fit with the spirit of the game, and aren't overly unfair.
TIPS: Who doesn't want to make the rules? // As the Arbiter, you get to torment the good team with rules they have to follow. These can be serious and restrictive, like asking that players only nominate neighbours, or that players cannot claim their actual role; or they can be chaotic and whimsical, like needing to include animal noises in any public statements. It's entirely up to you. // Both strategies are perfectly valid, and good players are equally likely to break rules in either respect, so have fun with it, and secure those kills whenever you can. // Make sure that your evil team also follows the rules so that they don't out themselves, and perhaps consider killing an already dead player in the event that someone does break a rule to frame them instead.
FIGHT: Look for people who break the rules! Evil players don't have to follow the Arbiter's rules, so breaking them won't result in extra kills. If this happens, it's possible you've found an evil player. // Otherwise, so long as you follow the rules, no-one gets hurt, right? Be diligent, and follow the rules as best as possible.
EX: Gale is the Arbiter. He asks the Storyteller to make a rule stating that players must only claim evil roles the next day. The Storyteller announces this rule the next day. The Tea Lady accidentally claims their actual role: the Arbiter is granted a kill during the night. // Nathen is the Recluse who follows the rule of thanking the person they nominate. They notice that Minnie did not say thank you at the end of their nomination, but no extra kill occurs during the night. Nathen correctly infers that Minnie is evil.

==== Blackmailer (minion)
LEDE: The Blackmailer forces a player to vote with another, with potentially lethal consequences if they don't.
HOW: While players can out that they have been blackmailed, be judicious about killing players who don't follow the restriction placed upon them.
TIPS: As the Blackmailer, you have the ability to tie together the votes of two players. How you do this is up to you. Perhaps you may want to bind one player with a correct read on the evil team to someone who is convinced of a very different - wrong - world; or maybe you'll force someone to vote for an evil player? How you play the Blackmailer really depends on what objective you wish to achieve, but with the penalty for not voting in line with the tethered player being death, players will be eager to follow along.
FIGHT: Simply put, don't break the one golden rule. Voting with the player you've been forced to align with is the best - and only - way to guarantee the Blackmailer doesn't kill you and the player you're bound to. // If you think you can spare it, and you are truly of the belief that you have the evil team dead to rights, consider breaking your chains and risk death. You're still free to vote as you please, albeit with consequences if it doesn't coincide with the player you've been tied to.
EX: Brennan is the Blackmailer. He forces the Balloonist to vote with the Zealot. The Balloonist must now vote on every nomination per the Zealot's ability. // Liam is the Engineer, who is told during the night he must vote with his neighbour. His neighbour - who Liam believes is evil - is voting with the evil team he has built. Liam breaks with his neighbour's voting pattern. Liam dies, but his neighbour does not.

==== Chatterpox (minion)
LEDE: The Chatterpox causes chaos by revealing Minion abilities that may - or may not - exist.
HOW: As a general rule, don't go overboard. The Chatterpox is a Minion, and should cause chaos, but too many false announcements can cause an unfun experience. For instance, announcing every possible Minion or Demon ability at night in a 1 Minion game makes the game nearly unsolvable for the good team. // With that said, if the timing is right, going overboard might be just the thing to spice up a game and give town the information they need to swing the game back in their favour. For instance, if town is convinced a Chatterpox is not in play, why not make them all "Cerenovus mad" as the same role, knowing a Cerenovus isn't in play? // Examples of false announcements would include Cerenovus madness, Harpy madness, Arbiter rules, Al Hadikhia announcements, Fearmonger picks, etc: anything that reveals itself in the process of operating is valid as part of the Chatterpox's ability. // Malfunctions can be varied in nature: the Al Hadikhia picking 2 or 4 players, the Fearmonger choosing the same target, the Harpy making someone mad at themselves, or even the Storyteller. Be creative!
TIPS: Sit back and enjoy. // No, seriously - so long as you stay alive, your ability is working, so let the chaos unfold around you. The Storyteller controls how your ability functions, so it may be subtle, it may be obvious, but it's always working. To aid in the process, perhaps try to convince your evil team to play into it, and make up false information of their own. This all but confirms that a Chatterpox is in play, but it does lend them some credibility, and might even be the only instance of that sort of announcement, if talking about Cerenovus madness, Harpy madness, and so on. // If a Chatterpox isn't in play, you can always simulate it by making up fake night cards - but beware: good players have no reason to do this, and so if it's ever puzzled out that a Chatterpox isn't in play, you might find yourself under suspicion.
FIGHT: Be cautious about what you reveal about how you were impacted by evil abilities at night. You may not be Cerenovus mad, but who's to say you definitely aren't? Wait until the day after you're freed to announce your madness - which in turn might give other players incentive to reveal the same. It's likely that if claims about being affected by Minion abilities don't stack up, a Chatterpox is in play, but of course, it could also be a bluff from evil players. // Keep an open mind, and be attentive. If a Storyteller gives you a night card or makes an announcement that seems like it may have been sent in error, unless the Storyteller corrects it, chances are it's a Chatterpox, and it'll be on your shoulders to let town know. An eye for detail is crucial in determining whether what you've seen is real or not.
EX: Jordan is the Chatterpox with a Cerenovus as their fellow Minion, and a Fang Gu as their Demon. During the night, the "Fearmonger" selects a player, and two players are told they are mad by the Cerenovus: only one of them is real. The next day, the player that really is mad breaks Cerenovus madness thinking it to be a Chatterpox, and is executed. // Devon is the Recluse who is told they have been selected by the Kazali to be the Widow. They do not see the Grimoire, nor do they learn who their team is. The Poppy Grower dies on Day 3, but Devon still learns nothing. They realise they were falsely picked by the Chatterpox.

==== Counterfeiter (minion)
LEDE: The Counterfeiter wields reminder tokens like a weapon, forging evidence out of thin air.
HOW: Be sure to place all relevant reminder tokens at the start of the game so that the Counterfeiter can move them as necessary.
TIPS: Under construction!
FIGHT: Under construction!
EX: George is the Counterfeiter. On Night 2, upon learning the Lleech host is the Noble, he moves the Lleech poison to the player he believes to be the Barber, while also making the Baron the Fortune Teller's Red Herring, and moving the Cannibal's reminder token to who he believes is the Drunk. // Dara is the Juggler. They juggle the Washerwoman, Noble and Fortune Teller successfully, but their info seems wrong. They can infer that the Counterfeiter is likely in play, and that their information is in some way corrupted.

==== Crook (minion)
LEDE: The Crook keeps nominations secret, and learns about who nominated.
HOW: Announce that the Crook is in play at the start of each day, if sober. For the rest of the day, people can approach you privately to note their nomination, and nominations run in the order they were given to you, skipping any invalid nominations (ie. a nomination on a previously nominated player). // The Crook receives all information on who nominated who, even nominations that didn't occur due to being rendered invalid. // All effects of nominations, such as the Virgin's ability, the Witch's ability, etc, should be carried out at the end of the day, after all nominations are exhausted. // For brevity, consider running only defense and pertinent information.
TIPS: The Crook is to nominations what the Organ Grinder is to votes - it obscures and conceals what is otherwise readily visible, learning all of the hot gossip at night. The Crook, therefore, is a useful tool in an evil toolkit to ensure evil players can push on good players with impunity, and can learn where town's suspicions might lie. You can use this information to find serial nominators for a Witch to kill later, get a sense of what sorts of conclusions have been drawn from private conversations, and see who's on the right track first, as they may be privy to information others simply don't have. // Generally, though, as long as you choose to be sober, you're doing your job - but if you're looking to frame a specific player as the Crook, drunkening yourself at night might be just the thing to sway a game.
FIGHT: Have you ever approached the Storyteller faking an Artist question? Of course you have. Now you have a new reason to harass the Storyteller - nominations! Perhaps you'd like to submit your nomination first in the day to ensure it's heard in full, or perhaps you'll want to go last to make sure town gives it the closest attention. Consider where the information lies and who is liable to nominate, as the order plays out in order of requests per day. You may even want to consider going to the Storyteller only to not nominate at all, just to see if the evil team is watching you, or giving them the impression you're sitting on damning information that you don't really have. Remember that the Crook, unless sat next to the Demon, can't relay who nominated who, so information is almost always going to be slightly delayed. Use it to your advantage.
EX: Mathilde is the Crook. She chooses to stay sober on Night 1, and the day is carried out per the Crook's ability. At night, she learns that four players nominated the claimed Klutz, and only one player - the Fortune Teller - nominated the Demon. // James is the Washerwoman confirming the Dreamer, who has seen the Demon as either the Pixie or the Po. James, learning this information, immediately approaches the Storyteller and opts to nominate them. Upon learning this the following night, the Crook passes this info on to the Po, who kills James, thinking them to be a powerful information role. Thanks for your sacrifice, James.

==== Doppelganger (minion)
LEDE: The Doppelganger steals a good player's identity and alignment, but leave clues to their true nature.
HOW: Remember that the Doppelganger’s role and alignment misregisters, as does the player they replace. This is useful for the Mathematician.
TIPS: You’ve supplanted a Townsfolk: have fun! Although someone around the Grimoire knows you are in play, offering credible information can lend you the credibility necessary to stay alive, and perhaps even implicate the other known player. Remember that because you register falsely, you don’t have to worry about characters like the Dreamer or Ravenkeeper who would otherwise be able to sniff you out, but keep in mind that if you stay alive too long, it’s likely that questions will be asked regarding why. If you’re found out, the world you’ve built might unravel, so prepare a graceful exit while you can. // If a Doppelganger is on script but not in play, you might want to consider being the “knowing” player: this will lead townsfolk to question whether their information is legitimate, or whether their powers are working as intended.
FIGHT: The biggest tells as to whether the Doppelganger is in play is that someone finds out at the start of the game. However, this isn’t always reliable, so instead, sniff out double claims. If two players claim the same role and won’t back down, it’s possible that one of them is a Minion. Remember that the one with the poisoned information just might be the real one.
EX: Kristin is the Doppelganger who has stolen the Dreamer's ability. The real Dreamer is poisoned. Kristin is able to learn the roles of Townsfolk, and spread misinformation about the evil team. // Ben is the General who learns that the Empath or the Dentist is the Doppelganger. Ben dies on Night 2. There is a double claim of Dentist, and one is able to correctly discern that the General is dead. The other claims the General is alive. Ben pushes on the Dentist with sober info, who turns out to be the Doppelganger.

==== Efreet (minion)
LEDE: The Efreet keeps a good Minion fighting for evil, turning a good player to the dark side in the process.
HOW: Be sure to include the Efreet on scripts that can't create extra evils. The Efreet creates a good character, but the player turned doesn't know this - extra evils can turn the voting majority substantially. // Given this shift in evil player count - both real and imagined - be judicious in what you pair the Efreet with. // This Minion requires a fairly familiar group of players, because like a Snake Charmer, the game can turn in an instant, and players may not like feeling as though they've had a portion of their agency ripped from them.
TIPS: As the Efreet, you are in an odd position whereby you cannot claim your role to your fellow Minions at first. Feel free to bluff as another Minion, or simply dance around the topic when asked. If you state that you are the Efreet to your team, the first Minion that dies by execution has the opportunity to out your team, so caution is paramount. Instead, continue to sell your bluffed Minion role to your ex-teammate, and know that you have the security of one new evil player, as well as a formerly evil Minion who will continue to act in the interests of your Demon. // Once your ability is spent, you can freely out this information to your other Minions and your Demon, so that they are also aware of a) who their new teammate is, and b) who they can safely dispatch should the need arise. // Another angle to take is, like a Demon pretending to be Snake Charmed, out an evil team that doesn’t exist under the pretence that you were a Minion who was turned good via execution. It’s a risky play, but under the right circumstances, might swing the game in your favour!
FIGHT: Pay attention to players who suddenly shift their allegiances. Like a Mezepheles turned player, Efreet turned players may learn things about the evil team that ultimately lead them to defend players they hadn’t previously, or act in ways that are contrary to their previous behaviours. If you ever have a way of confirming that an Efreet is in play, consider bending the ear of a recently executed Minion to persuade them to fill you in on who the evil players are. // You may also want to look for sudden inconsistencies in information that may point towards an evil turned player: if, for instance, an Empath suddenly changes their numbers, or if a Savant gives provably false statements, there’s a chance they’ve been turned: use that opportunity to work towards a world in which an Efreet has had a hand in proceedings.
EX: Laura is the Efreet, claiming to be the Poisoner. The Harpy is executed on Day 3, and turns good that night. The Innkeeper turns evil the same night. // Nathaniel is the Blackmailer, who was executed on Day 2. On Day 4, the sober Village Idiot checks them and sees them as good. Nathaniel realises that there has not been any suggestion of Cerenovus madness, despite hearing that one is in play, and realises they have been turned by the Efreet. They out their evil team. Hooray!

==== Embalmer (minion)
LEDE: The Embalmer suspends players in undeath, leaving uncertainty about who is alive and who is not.
HOW: Remember that characters who are dead do not have an ability. Do not wake "dead" players during the Night Phase, nor give information to "dead" players who would gain information during the day. // Remember that the usual practice of not waking poisoned or drunk players is a "rule" you can break with the Embalmer. Poisoned or drunk players who do not wake may think they are dead - but remember that unless a Professor or other reviving role is in play, should the Embalmer ever make themselves drunk or die, they will know this has happened. // If any abilities would cause deaths during the day like the Cerenovus, Psychopath or Golem, don't hint that they may have happened, as this reveals an Embalmer is definitely in play! // When the Embalmer is drunk, they are drunk from that point on. // If any death would cause the game to end, this still happens.
TIPS: The Barrow-Fog returns - now in Minion form! // As the Embalmer, players who die for reasons other than execution register as alive, blurring the line between life and death, and making the game state uncertain - but the evil team knows exactly what is going on... usually. // If you find an opportune moment to make yourself drunk, be it to frame a specific player who has been saddled with accusations of being the Embalmer, or to frame a specific world where an Embalmer has been made drunk or taken out of play, the big reveal will come with a cost in the form of a swathe of night deaths, sure, but may just secure you enough social credit to coast for the remainder of the game. Be judicious with your ability, and know when to take yourself out of play. // Remember that players who die at night will lose their ability, so don't claim to wake with information if you're suggesting you may have died.
FIGHT: Ongoing information roles tend to be more difficult kills in Embalmer games. Given that you wake each night, you'll know exactly when you have died, because you won't wake anymore. On the flipside, "spent" roles, first night roles, or roles with passive abilities are much harder to track, which will cause lots of uncertainty as to the game state. Track when you lose your information, if ever, reverse-engineer the kills from there, and use that information in addition to what you've received thus far to sniff out the Embalmer and reveal the game state - permanently.
EX: Tania is the Embalmer. Her Demon, the Po, kills 3 people on Night 5, and the Godfather kills on the same night. Tania makes herself drunk, resulting in 6 players suddenly being shown as dead the next morning. Tania claims to be the Engineer who has taken the Embalmer out of play! // Benjamin is the Dentist. The Chef nominates the Virgin, but nothing happens. Benjamin checks the Chef that night and learns a yes, indicating that they likely died to the Virgin, confirming the Embalmer is in play.

==== Firebug (minion)
LEDE: The Firebug plays hot potato to give the Demon extra killing power.
HOW: Remember that dead players still choose to pass the bomb at night. If they choose a player who is already dead by some other means, prompt them to choose again. // If the Alchemist gains this ability, the subsequent death is at the Storyteller's discretion: consider killing characters detrimental to town, or even Minions if the game requires rebalancing.
TIPS: The Firebug gets to play with bombs, which can carry serious consequences if they ever go off. Your job is to discern who might be holding the bomb at any given moment, and have your Demon target them in the night to score an extra kill. As an added bonus, if evil players ever hold the bomb, you'll learn about it, so use that to your advantage and try to co-ordinate your actions. // This character requires a bit of good fortune to be effective, but know that as long as you live, the bomb is out there, somewhere. Pinning down its location will accelerate the game rapidly and lets your Demon sprint to the finish line.
FIGHT: While it's scary to have an explosive hot potato bouncing around town, there is some information to be had in the event that it ever goes off. If you passed the bomb to a player one night, and then the next night a double kill occurs, while it's possible that the Demon got lucky, there's also a chance you passed it to an evil player, who co-ordinated the next night with their Demon! Triangulate this information with any other information going around town, and you might be able to pin down the evil team as quickly as they are managing to kill your fellow players. Remember that the Firebug's power is greatly diminished with no living evil players to bounce off, so if you can secure those vital Minion kills, the Firebug is all but removed from play, as you'll be able to openly discuss where the bomb will go next.
EX: Russell is the Firebug, and the Washerwoman holds the bomb on Night 1. The Washerwoman proceeds to choose the Firebug on Night 2. The Firebug learns this. On Night 3, they pass the bomb to their fellow Minion, who is killed by the Vigormortis the same night. Since the Firebug's bomb has gone off, the Vigormortis is allowed to choose again. // June is the Oracle. On Night 3, two players die, and June learns a 1. June knows that one of the two players killed was likely a Minion killed by a Vigormortis. In a 9 player game, June knows that no other Minions can hold the bomb, and only the Demon remains as a valid evil bomb holder.

==== Gerrymanderer (minion)
LEDE: The Gerrymanderer doesn't like nominations that don't meet the majority, and punishes town for failure.
HOW: A tied nomination is also a failed nomination, so make sure to mark those as you would nominations that fall well short. // Giving ample time for nominations allows the Gerrymanderer to operate: consider setting a timer for the nomination process to ensure players know how long they have before day's end. // Votes for things other than nomination (such as cults or exiles) do not count towards the Gerrymanderer’s tally.
TIPS: You are a Minion that impacts an overlooked aspect of the game: failed nominations. Your job, therefore, is simple. Sow discord, give others cause to nominate, and reap the rewards. Take advantage of roles like Town Crier, Gatekeeper or Flowergirl to rack up failed votes under the guise of gathering information, and reassure town that you are acting in their best interest. You thrive in towns that cannot agree on who to execute, and you are most potent in situations where the evil team isn’t doing the nominating, so consider asking your fellow evil team members to refrain from nominating unless there is a good reason to do so. If you are asked to kill during the night, you can, of course, expedite town’s demise, but you may also choose to hide yourself by killing a dead player, and giving town the impression you don’t exist - until such time that you can maximise your impact late game.
FIGHT: If there is a Gerrymanderer in play, you’ll need to be cautious about who votes, and when. Is there a Gatekeeper playing particularly fast and loose? Or perhaps a handful of players who are constantly trying to feed the Town Crier information? There is a chance those players may well be massaging nominations to feed the Gerrymanderer. Consider testing the waters with failed nominations early to see if a Gerrymanderer will show themselves, as that is when they are least damaging. Of course, the best defence against the Gerrymanderer is to nominate decisively and cautiously: keeping failed votes at 2 or less will effectively remove them from play, so watch for players who try to push it over the limit.
EX: Travis is the Gerrymanderer. Two players have nominated today, both failures, and so Travis nominates the Savant. Town is forced to put the Savant on the block, or fail and risk the Gerrymanderer killing at night. // Belle is the Librarian who has confirmed a Saint is in play. At 2 nominations today, both failed, Travis nominates the Saint. Belle realises this is the Gerrymanderer trying to push on the Saint at a point where the Gerrymanderer would kill, and so Belle nominates Travis instead.

==== Lady Lace (minion)
LEDE: Lady Lace causes multiple players to be poisoned throughout the game, dying a dramatic death not long after.
HOW: Remember to set a note regarding Lady Lace’s time of death! Without it, you may miss the chance to kill Lady Lace when you should, and potentially corrupt town’s information.
TIPS: You are a Poisoner with greater potency by far, but unlike the Poisoner, you are on borrowed time: maximise your effect by sniping high-value roles, and cause as much chaos as you can before your time is up. // Given that you must die after a certain number of nights, you can coordinate with your Demon such that it might cover your demise: have the Demon kill you in the night, or sell a situation where an Assassin, Gossip, or other non-Demon death occurred. // If no such conditions exist in the game, you may also want to consider putting yourself up for execution before your time expires: though this is a loss for the evil team, and your poisoning will be reversed, at least you’ll have covered your tracks such that there may be no obvious sign that you were ever in play.
FIGHT: If Lady Lace is on a script, consider making a note of who dies on the night that corresponds to when Lady Lace should die: there is a good chance that if nothing seems irregular, the evil team just lost one of their Minions. Reverse engineer the information you have on hand to work out who was poisoned, and when, and you’ll be able to determine what information is trustworthy.
EX: Penny is Lady Lace. She poisons the Chef on Night 1, the Empath on Night 2, and the Gambler on Night 3. The Demon kills an already dead player. On Day 3, the Storyteller announces that Penny - and only Penny - is dead. // Murphy is the Empath who is poisoned on Night 1, receiving a zero. His neighbours do not change. On Night 4, he receives a 1. Murphy can infer that Penny, who died on Night 3, may have been Lady Lace.

==== Muckraker (minion)
LEDE: The Muckraker thrives off scandal, causing death at night due to false declarations about the town.
HOW: As with the Gossip, consider what would be termed a “valid” statement. “X is good” is a valid statement, for instance, but something like “X is not not good” is not a validly different statement. Statements that refer to situations outside the game, or joke statements don’t count. When taking statements, preference those with their hands up first where possible, but if players are eager, try to select different players each time so that everyone has a turn to prove themselves. If the Muckraker dies, continue to take statements as per normal. // If a Muckraker is drunk or preached on its first day, its presence is not announced to the town until its power is active.
TIPS: Unlike the Gossip, who causes deaths on the basis of true statements, the Muckraker causes deaths if any or all of the statements are false. As such, make claims that sound plausible, but ultimately turn out to be untrue, and encourage your teammates to do the same. Draw suspicion to the statements that are made, puzzle out how you may be able to twist them to your advantage: and if not, enjoy free information about the town to help hone your Demon’s kills! Also contrary to the Gossip’s ability, for as long as your ability is in play, players must make Muckraker statements, so there is no opting out when the game state becomes tenuous. // You may also want to consider poisoning the Muckraker if possible and jumping in with an untrue statement that sells false worlds, but remember that the Muckraker has to be poisoned at the point they would activate in the night.
FIGHT: Given that there are things you know to be true about the game, feel free to jump in and share them with town to fulfill the requirements of the Muckraker, but do remember that you may feed valuable information to the evil team in the process. Keep your statements vague enough to be valid, or reveal information that is already public. Consider tracking Muckraker statements to pull together an understanding of the world, and puzzle out which statements are false (and who is making them!)
EX: James is the Muckraker. On Day 1, three good players make true statements, and no-one dies. On Day 2, a good player makes a false statement, and someone dies at night. On Night 4, James is poisoned: during the day, James makes a false statement about their Demon's alignment. No-one dies at night. // Marta is the Noble, who claims on Day 1 that their Noble pings are a valid Noble ping; two other players declare that a Muckraker is in play, and an Imp (the only Demon on script) is in play. Someone dies at night: Marta infers that she was poisoned on Night 1.

==== Necromancer (minion)
LEDE: The Necromancer steals abilities from dead players.
HOW: If the Necromancer's chosen player is revived by some means, the Necromancer loses their ability.
TIPS: While the obvious choice for a Necromancer is to gain the ability of a dead Minion, this isn't necessarily your only option. Perhaps you can steal the Savant's ability and gain statements about the game during the day? Or perhaps you'd rather become the Dreamer, learning about player's roles? The Necromancer is a versatile Minion that can be used for information gathering, or to keep Minion abilities in play, so the choice is up to you.
FIGHT: You've confirmed that town has killed the Fearmonger, but the next night, the Fearmonger has chosen a new player? It must be the Necromancer! // Confirming that Minions have died is a surefire way to determine that a Necromancer is about. If you can determine that, then you know which Minions are in play, and you know there's far less to fear than before. // Be equally wary of players who claim the roles of dead players: while those dead players may have been bluffing their role, it's equally possible that a Necromancer has stolen their ability to gain credibility. Discerning the difference is the best way to figure out whether a Necromancer is on the loose or not.
EX: Zak is the Necromancer. He selects the Witch who died to their own ability, and gains that power from that point on. // Susan is the Nightwatchman. There is no double claim of their role, but upon their death on Day 3, another player claims to have received a Nightwatchman's call. Susan can infer that a Necromancer has assumed her ability.

==== Saboteur (minion)
LEDE: The Saboteur intercepts abilities and redirects them to whomever they please.
HOW: Remember that the Saboteur’s ability works only on abilities that target or learn something about the selected player. For instance, the Baku’s kills cannot be redirected since they are chosen by the Storyteller; and if the Grandchild dies, the Grandmother must also die too, since they are inextricably linked to their ability. Other roles, like the Dreamer, Empath, Gambler, Fortune Teller, etc. all work with the Saboteur as stated. // If the good team is in a terrible position, you can soften the power of the Saboteur in some instances. For instance, you may decide that the two names received as part of a Sage ping do not include the real Demon, but if evil is dominating, consider swapping out the red herring for the player the Saboteur chooses, and including the real Demon anyway.
TIPS: The Saboteur is an incredibly versatile Minion who can play a number of roles: you can spread misinformation by misdirecting Townsfolk abilities; you can protect your Demon by pushing certain abilities away from them; acting during game setup, you can fundamentally change the makeup of the game; and of course, you can take the reins away from your Demon and push kills on to better targets (or so you hope!) // The flipside to this is that without knowing what ability you are foisting on to another player, you may inadvertently muddy your own understanding of the town, or accidentally aid good players: so this is a Minion that naturally scales in power as the game progresses, and you understand more about the game state.
FIGHT: Given that the Saboteur redirects information, rather than outright poisoning it, you can reliably assume that for the most part, the information you are receiving is valid, even if inaccurate. A sabotaged Washerwoman, for instance, will receive a Townsfolk character that is indeed in play, but they may not be who you expect. A sabotaged Nightwatchman still sends out their signal, but a different player may receive it. If your information is pointing in a strange direction, ask yourself: why them? Perhaps you were misled to foster trust with an evil player - or perhaps you were a random target. Knowing who your information isn’t pointing to can still be valuable.
EX: Ginny is the Saboteur. They select themselves and their neighbour, the Empath. The Empath, whose neighbours are the Town Crier and the Saboteur, learns a zero. // Jin is the Dreamer. He selects his neighbour, learning that he is the Washerwoman or the Saboteur. The next day, he speaks with that player who claims to be the Juggler. He realises that he was selected by the Saboteur, redirecting information to themselves, claiming to be the Washerwoman.

==== Wispr (minion)
LEDE: The Wispr projects itself to another point on the Grimoire to corrupt information.
HOW: This is a fairly mechanically heavy Minion in that it alters the physical layout of the Grimoire. If in person, consider placing a token between the two players to signify the Wispr is there. Otherwise, double check information you're sending to ensure it's accurate. // If the Wispr is targeted directly, remember where they are sitting so that it registers as appropriate. // Given that this power is at the Storyteller's discretion, if town's information is too ruined with the Wispr in play, consider misregistering it only some of the time to give good a chance to puzzle it out.
TIPS: The one big decision to make when playing as the Wispr is when to make yourself drunk. You can ruin the Tea Lady's day, and cause the Empath to question reality, but at some point, you may accidentally be pushing on your own evil team. At that point, it's time to pull the ripcord and get out of there: but know that a good player will learn that this happens. At that point, town will be on high alert for strange information, so the choice is tougher than you might think. Perhaps you slip out earlier than expected to cause chaos, or go a little later to implicate other players. // If a Wispr is not in play, perhaps it's time to put out a fake Wispr call! Doing so will cause town to question their information to date, even though you know it to be true.
FIGHT: If you think a Wispr is in play, question everything. Otherwise reliable information like the Chef or Clockmaker can be wildly inaccurate due to the Wispr's existence, but discerning where the Wispr might be registering from, rather than where they really are, is equally powerful information! If the Clockmaker did, indeed, get a 2, but players in those positions are confirmed by other means, perhaps something is awry about town's information? // Additionally, the Wispr's call is a signal to town to re-evaluate: use that opportunity to puzzle out what your new information looks like, in order to determine where the Wispr lies, but who - and what - they were covering.
EX: Lars is the Wispr neighbouring the Klutz and the Oracle, projecting themselves inbetween the Recluse and the Gossip. The Chef learns a 1. // Lochie is the Barber who learns that a Wispr has made themselves drunk. They announce it in the morning. The Empath, receiving a 1 overnight despite their neighbours not changing, determines that the Wispr is likely one of their living neighbours.

==== Abomination (demon)
LEDE: The Abomination trades voting power in town for additional Minion abilities.
HOW: Minion abilities given to the Abomination can be in-play.
TIPS: The days of coordinating Minion abilities are over - you are your own tool belt! With two Minion abilities in whatever combination the Storyteller chooses, you can cause chaos in a controlled manner, ensuring that you achieve the desired result 100% of the time. If there's a pesky Ravenkeeper making your life difficult, you can guarantee they are poisoned upon their death - or if a powerful information role is getting a little too close, you can Pit Hag someone into a Sweetheart and kill them in one felled swoop. // Perhaps you might even have Minion abilities that are also in-play - meaning you can double up on those abilities, and make life that much harder for the good team. But beware: being overly enthusiastic with these abilities might out that an Abomination is in play.
FIGHT: Remember that the Abomination's key weakness is a lack of Minions - with one less than usual, voting patterns become much more interesting to observe. // Keep an eye out for doubled Minion abilities to discern that an Abomination is in play.
EX: Amon is the Abomination with the abilities of the Witch and the Poisoner. They curse the Barber, then poison and kill the Ravenkeeper on Night 3. // Peter is the Mutant who is made mad as both the Seamstress and the Missionary. They realise that there is an Abomination in play. They break madness that same day and announce to the town that they were made mad twice, which can only be the result of an Abomination and Cerenovus targeting them at the same time.

==== Baku (demon)
LEDE: The Baku inverts the information of those they speak to.
HOW: This is a fairly intensive Demon to run because you have to track private conversations - a simple token reminder while you stay in town is generally a good way to handle this, as would be keeping private notes. Try to corrupt the information of the Townsfolk that would best balance the game state.
TIPS: Talk, talk, talk! Private conversations are your greatest weapon: with them, you corrupt information. Take on a role that is ready and willing to privately share information, and be enthusiastic about sharing it. // Alternatively, if you have specific Townsfolk on the table that you wish to cause problems for, limit your conversations to that select few, or bounce ideas off Outsiders and the evil team to ensure that the number of Townsfolk who can be impacted by your ability is slim without implicating yourself. Finding a balance between these two approaches is best, but the way you play the Baku is heavily influenced by town dynamics. // Note who you speak to during the day, as this will serve as a useful reminder of who is, and isn’t impacted by your ability.
FIGHT: The Baku’s greatest strength is in separating and flipping the information of players: so form a trusted coalition with the abundant information roles on the script, and form up! // Of course, you will need to be wary of the possibility that a Minion or the Baku itself is in that conversation: so while you may feel more obliged to share important info given the threat the Baku poses, oversharing will almost certainly lead to nasty consequences. If that happens, use it to your advantage by tracking who you spoke with to reverse engineer who may be evil. This becomes clearer as the game wears on, as players who die at night can track conversations and pin down the Demon. // You may even opt to stay out in the open, and never enter into private chats! If so, be prepared to be information-poor for most of the game, but at least you can (probably) trust your own information.
EX: Julien is the Baku. They speak with five players on Day 1: the Dentist, Savant, Colossus, Blackmailer and Saboteur. The Savant, after speaking with Julien, receives two wrong statements as their information. // Cerys is the Chef who learns true information on Night 1. They are immediately executed, and hears of a Savant who claims their information suggests their Chef 0 does not exist. Cerys asks the Savant to list who they spoke to the previous day, narrowing the Demon down to four possible players.

==== Chronos (demon)
LEDE: The Chronos causes information to swing between right and wrong.
HOW: So long as you are cognisant of the order in which information is right or wrong, the Chronos is fairly simple to run. Remember that, as with the Vortox, only Townsfolk are affected - and so characters like the Drunk still receive arbitrary information - poisoned or drunk Townsfolk do not.
TIPS: Crucially, you don't start knowing whether your information is right or wrong - so get a gauge on what town's information sounds like in order to fit in. Once you know your own cadence, it's easy to play along. // When you choose to flip the script, however, is up to you. It's recommended not to do this on the first night, as not only does it confirm your presence, but it is somewhat of a waste - but any point from then on is a reasonable time to switch it up. Just remember to keep up. // However, it is equally viable to give false information, especially in a town with a low number of information roles, in order to draw the line in the sand between the good and evil team. Without an abundance of ways to confirm info, who's to say who's right or wrong?
FIGHT: Fighting the Chronos is no different to fighting a Demon like the Vortox - if you know your information is wrong, the opposite, therefore, must be correct. However, discerning whether a Chronos is in play - and which way the information leans - is much harder. You may not be able to risk not executing if a Vortox is also on script, but if you hear that someone received information about a Chronos at night, perhaps it's time to re-evaluate. // Figuring out a Chronos is in play is the first step - reverse engineering your information to fit the Chronos' cadence is the next. Puzzle that out, and you're closer than ever to winning.
EX: Tony is the Chronos. Information starts out wrong. On Night 4, when information would be correct, Tony uses his ability, switching information back to being wrong. One good player learns that this has happened. // Lani is the Chambermaid who chooses the same two people on Night 2 and 3. She learns a 1 and a 2. The two players in question claim to be the unspent Seamstress and the Mime. She reasonably assumes that she was impacted by the Chronos on Night 2.

==== Ein (demon)
LEDE: The Ein creates a second Demon, and uses them as a host in the event of their death.
HOW: Keep in mind that the Zwei must also be added on scripts containing the Ein in order for it to function. The only Demon available at setup is the Ein: the Zwei is selected on the Ein's first night and cannot be selected on its own.
TIPS: The Ein's strength is in numbers: while the Zwei doubles the amount of Demons on the Grimoire, making it more susceptible to Demon-finding roles like the Fortune Teller, it also creates an inbuilt Scarlet Woman to pass to should the need arise, and with its own ability to win when 3 players live, as well as the Zwei's ability to poison its good-aligned neighbours (for better or worse), you have tremendous strength to start, which wanes substantially if it - or the Zwei - is killed. So do your best to protect your other half, since they are key in ensuring your power is maximised. // Remember that with one less Minion, you have less versatility overall, but the Zwei's ability to poison is permanent as long as it lives, so use it to your advantage.
FIGHT: Two Demons on the board usually spells chaos for the town, but with an Ein in play, it's business as usual. Double the Demons in play means double the opportunities to find them, so get killing! Executing players who are seen as a viable Demon candidate may weaken the Ein substantially, so don't bide your time waiting for clarifying information, because you may not have the luxury of a final 3 to decide what is and what isn't. // You are forced to play offensive to weaken the Ein and ultimately win the game, not just because of its unique win condition, but because your information will be fractured and seemingly unreliable. Once you know it's in play, don't delay.
EX: Maurice is the Ein, bluffing as the Mayor. He chooses Scott - the Zealot - to become the Zwei, who in turn poisons his good neighbours - the Librarian who ultimately confirms him as the Zealot, and the Klutz, who picks Maurice - but is sadly poisoned, oh no. Maurice protects Scott, wishing against enabling a Godfather kill at night, and Scott protects Maurice, supporting a Mayor victory. Maurice and Scott wake at the final 3, and congratulate each other on a job well done. // Brie is the General. She learns that evil is winning on Night 1. She correctly surmises that a powerful role has been selected by the Ein to become the Zwei. She notes one player in particular is especially protective of the player claiming to be the Empath and moves to execute them. She learns good is winning that night.

==== Hypnox (demon)
LEDE: The Hypnox starts alone, but can summon their evil Minions in an instant.
HOW: The Storyteller impacts a Hypnox game substantially in that you choose the Minions that rise once the Hypnox dies at night. Consider the game state at the time this happens, and ensure that you are choosing Minions that are the most fair - and fun - for the current game state. Choosing who becomes the Hypnox can be arbitrary, but also consider their position on the Grimoire: seating the new Hypnox next to a character like the Empath or Tea Lady may prove to be too difficult for the evil team to sell, and may end the game quickly, so you may want to consider putting more expendable Minions in those positions instead. // Also, try playing with the Hypnox and Lunatic on the same script - it's great fun.
TIPS: This is a unique Demon in that you have no starting Minions. This places you in a precarious situation from the outset, however you can rest assured knowing that there is plenty of misinformation that will no doubt help to cast suspicion on others, and drive suspicion away from you. Use that to your advantage, sow doubt amongst the town, and then when the time is right, activate your ability and pass the torch to your newly risen evil team! // You can choose to play the Hypnox as a versatile poisoning character who, like a No Dashii, locks certain players into receiving misinformation, or into powers that misfire: but like the Imp, you have the ability to die safely if you’re uncomfortable with the level of suspicion aimed your way. Play it by ear, and judge the best time to make the jump. // You may consider telling your chosen players about their situation, and coordinate with them to begin framing worlds, but of course, you run the risk of being outed before you have a chance to pass to them - so be careful.
FIGHT: Like the No Dashii, finding players whose information feels at odds with the rest of town, or whose abilities don’t seem to be working as intended gives you a great insight as to whether a Hypnox is a) in play, and b) has chosen specific players. You may want to consider killing those players off early to prevent the Hypnox from gaining maximal benefit out of their ability. // Players who were once comfortable with execution that suddenly no longer want to die may have been turned by the Hypnox, so watch out for any strange behaviours, sudden changes of heart, or wildly incorrect information! // Crucially, if you know that a Hypnox has made the jump, you know that the evil team is down by one: track the possible source, and look to see who they align with the strongest.
EX: Ross is the Hypnox. He selects two players - the Noble and the Village Idiot - on Night 1. On night 3, Ross uses his ability and dies at night. The Noble becomes the Hypnox, and the Village Idiot becomes the Witch. // Ryan is the Acrobat. He selects the Noble on Night 2 and dies. Town moves to execute the Noble under suspicion that they might be chosen by the Hypnox.

==== Patient Zero (demon)
LEDE: Patient Zero spreads poison and death throughout town.
HOW: You have an incredible amount of control over the game state: given that a good living neighbour of the recent executed must be killed, and the other must be poisoned, what you choose to inflict on each may lead to game-solving information. Assess the game state and use discretion to ensure balance is being maintained. For instance, if good is doing particularly well, you can hide evil neighbours with poisoning, and of course, if evil is dominating, it may be useful to out a Minion to balance out the numbers. This is a very dynamic Demon that can move through a game quickly, so good luck!
TIPS: You have no control over your kills, except for trying to direct where nominations are pointing each day. As such, you and your Minions need to play an active role in seeding bad information, drawing suspicion towards players of your choosing, and ensuring you get kills on the board by other means. // Of course, your additional win condition, unique to that of the Vortox, demands that living players be executed each day, so there is no opportunity to sacrifice a dead body in the same way - which in turn prevents town from finding evil players by simply killing the same corpse over and over. This means that town’s ability to discern who is evil is limited, so push that advantage! Claim to be a poisoned neighbour of a recently killed good player, and do your best to verify poisoned players’ claims if it would help your team. // This in turn should cause players near recent executees to examine their information and doubt what they have received, so feel free to reach out to them and provide reasons as to why their sober, healthy information might not be. // Remember that you (probably) know your evil team, and you can figure out who is poisoned with bad info from who has died in the night, so you should always have the informational advantage.
FIGHT: Vote wisely. Patient Zero can only kill good, sober living neighbours of the recent executee, so if you have located specific characters that are a “good” execution for the day and are willing to hedge your bets, go through with it. This limits Patient Zero’s ability to poison ongoing information or snuff out active abilities that would otherwise protect town. If an execution goes through on a player you are less happy with killing, take care to examine what information comes out of the night - but more specifically, examine who is impacted. Players who are poisoned or killed by Patient Zero in the night are confirmably good and once sober, so use that to your advantage, and if there are obvious gaps, you may have found your next execution!
EX: Noor is Patient Zero. On Day 1, they nominate and execute the Cartographer. The Cartographer's neighbour dies that night, and their other neighbour, the Mechanical Man, is poisoned. // Quentin is the Mutant sitting two seats away from the most recently executed player. They claim to be the Mutant on Day 3, and is not executed. Quentin assumes they are poisoned, and nominates the other neighbour of the most recently executed player, believing them to be evil.

==== Polterghast (demon)
LEDE: The Polterghast plays dead.
HOW: Consider running this Demon on scripts where multiple deaths in the night are common. Tinker, Gambler, Gossip, Assassin or Acrobat, for instance, are great roles to pair with a Polterghast and enables them to make the most of their ability without being found out easily.
TIPS: You are a Demon with slices of the reality-bending power of the Zombuul, and the poisoning power of a Vigormortis, but with greater agility and flexibility. Use it to your advantage! Bluffing roles like the Gossip or Gambler enable you to sell a world where you have died to your ability, and push suspicion on to others while also corrupting information around town. Choosing when to activate your unique ability - and how - lets you control the narrative of the game. // You can, for instance, “die” during the night alongside another Townsfolk to sell an otherwise difficult Gambler or Tinker bluff; or you can sink a kill on an already dead player and use your ability to register as the only death during the night. Doing so may steer town away from a world where a Polterghast even exists! // Adapt your playstyle to the situation and know when it’s time to go, and the Polterghast becomes an incredibly strong Demon to pin down.
FIGHT: Polterghasts will frequently bluff roles that may die in the night given certain circumstances, so follow their claims closely. If their gossips or gambles sound implausible, there’s a good chance they’re bluffing about the reasons for their death in the night. // Similarly, as opposed to a Vigormortis where poisoned Townsfolk simply point to killed Minions, poisoned Townsfolk may give you a direct line to the Demon itself! // Also consider that until a Polterghast activates their ability, they are a stationary, “normal” Demon, so you only need to start worrying about whether a Polterghast is pulling tricks until viable candidates have died in the night.
EX: Kimberly is the Polterghast claiming to be the Gossip. With seven players remaining, they gossip that the Demon is one specific player. They use their ability at night, poisoning their neighbour, and kill elsewhere. // Bobby is the Fortune Teller with a yes on a claimed Tinker. The Tinker appears to die at night. Bobby nominates the dead Tinker, just to make sure. Bobby was right.

==== Seiren (demon)
LEDE: The Seiren turns players to their team before their final moments.
HOW: While the Seiren acts early during the night, the decay of its turning isn’t until dawn for recently dead players. Don’t forget to turn characters back as necessary to ensure that only one remains evil for the next day.
TIPS: The Seiren is an incredibly powerful Demon with the ability to temporarily ‘recruit’ teammates. Early on, this provides you with ample cover from Townsfolk abilities, since a turned player will register as evil to characters such as the Seamstress or Empath. But, later in the game, players turned by the Seiren may have the ability to win the game alongside you and may actively assist you! As you learn more about the game state, consider who you turn and when, as some players may be more inclined to assist than others. // Also remember that because players who are turned register as evil all the way up until dawn, this ensures characters like the Oracle will see them as evil, so don’t be afraid to push on players you turn. But remember that ultimately, those players will be able to confess that they were only temporarily evil, so if you’re too eager, town might figure you out.
FIGHT: If you suspect a Seiren is in play, be careful about when you use abilities that check alignment, like the Seamstress. You can’t be certain that the information you have is true, even if sober, so try to find other sources of confirmation. Additionally, if you are a character who can get a read on multiple characters at once, you can use the turned player as a starting point, and use it to compare to other players! Did your Seamstress get a ‘yes’ between a turned player and their neighbour? If so, you may reasonably deduce that the neighbour is evil too!
EX: Zoe is the Seiren. They select the Mutant, who neighbours the Recluse. That same night, the Chef receives a 2 instead of a 1. // Teri is the Balloonist who is turned evil on Night 5. On Day 5, just three players remain. Teri realises they must play for evil, so they change their Balloonist pings at the last minute. Sneaky Teri.

==== Shogun (demon)
LEDE: The Shogun is known to everyone and will take everyone down with him, unless his hidden Minions are killed.
HOW: This character uses a lot of jinxes, so be cognisant of them, and remind players about them prior to the game's commencement. // Consider putting a number of powerful information roles on scripts with the Shogun, as there are far less chances to find and kill evil players.
TIPS: This is the most outed evil a player can be, so enjoy it. Normally being outed as evil is unhelpful, but given that Minions and Demons do not know each other, players will come to you to curry favour and convince you that they are worth keeping around. Use town's information against them, as their accusations will lead you to your evil team, and see if their stories check out before you brutally kill someone during the day. // Given that you kill during the day, you may opt to forego your ability on Day 1 so that you don't inadvertently kill a Minion, but perhaps not? The odds of killing a good player are never better, so you may consider going for broke. // Importantly, while Minions are expendable, they are also your only line of defense. Convincing town that your Minions yet live is the only thing keeping them from turning on you, so frame others, be loud, and direct traffic as much as possible.
FIGHT: Remember that roles like the Chef, Town Crier and Empath that locate evil players, or Minions in general, can be harmful to town, as it outs the evil team to the Shogun, or even creates frames the Shogun can lean on to convince town to kill otherwise good players. Keeping information relatively discrete and perhaps even lying about your information might be useful, but finding a balance is essential. // Remember that the Shogun will inevitably kill in final 3, so if you find yourself on the penultimate day, know that you will need to chance it and go for the Shogun!
EX: Alex is the Shogun. He is immediately announced to town, and over the coming days, with 5 players remaining, town is convinced that all Minions are dead. They execute Alex that day, but the Poisoner still lives. Alex's team wins. // Peter is the General who learns, after several days of evil winning, that the game is now neutral. He chooses to out that evil is still winning to keep a dead Minion hidden. On the day that he learns that good is winning, he correctly discerns that all Minions are dead.

==== Umbra (demon)
LEDE: The Umbra evades execution, moving about the Grimoire, poisoning neighbours in the process.
HOW: Balance the game around the Umbra's poisoning: misinformation in the wrong places can cause the game to become near-unsolvable, so being diligent with where the poisoning lies, and sometimes sending it to dead players, can help temper the Umbra's power.
TIPS: You are a hyper-mobile Demon who sacrifices deaths at night in order to move about and poison players. Consider utilising Minions that kill like the Muckraker, Assassin or Gerrymanderer to cover your tracks. // Remember that swapping to a Minion does eliminate the "instance" of that Minion - so if you're swapping to your Cerenovus, their madness is removed. But the upside is that swapping to a one-use Minion such as the Necromancer or Assassin renews their ability, meaning they can use it again! // Learning where to swap to in order to guarantee the best poison, and when to swap is essential, so that you are best equipped to win as the Umbra.
FIGHT: Like Demons such as the Vigor Mortis and No Dashii, who poison nearby players, finding sources of poison within a certain proximity is key to defeating the Umbra. If a player wakes to find their information doesn't quite stack up, there's a chance they neighbour the new Umbra - so strike while they're still there. Poisoning in this context is as much a clue as it is a hindrance, but beware other forms of poisoning and drunkenness: it could be an Umbra, but it could also just be a Philosopher who has sadly chosen your ability. // Nights of no deaths are the strongest indicator that an Umbra is about, so use those opportunities to audit your information, and figure out where they could have jumped to.
EX: Damien is the Umbra. He selects the Chef on Night 2, who dies. He then selects the Chatterpox on Night 3, poisoning their neighbour, the Seamstress. The Assassin kills that night to cover Damien's swap. // Nick is the Medicine Man who selects the same two players each night. On Night 3, he learns that one of them has been targeted by poisoning or madness. No deaths occur that night. Nick knows that the Umbra neighbours one of those two players.

==== Yin (demon)
LEDE: The Yin hunts for its other half, and transforms into something more powerful upon its death.
HOW: This is a fairly straightforward Demon, but just remember that if the Yin picks the Yang that you must turn the Yang evil before swapping them with the Yin, to ensure you’ve properly “recruited” the Yang. // The Yang and Yin-Yang must be on the same script as the Yin in order for them to function.
TIPS: Find your other half! With one less Minion to ally yourself with, you are at an immediate disadvantage, however the knowledge that the Yang is out there should give you some reassurance. Finding them allows you to not only recruit them into your ranks, but to be agile, avoiding suspicion through Exorcist abilities, Flowergirl information and the like; and causing confusion as town can’t seem to pin down where demon candidates reside. While finding a Yang does mean that no deaths occur in the night, you can coordinate your actions with a Godfather or Assassin to ensure the extra death at night looks like a normal demon kill, ensuring that town won’t suspect that a Yin/Yang swap has taken place. // Additionally, choosing the Yang at night enables you to swap characters, giving you the versatility of playing as another role, and having control over two aspects of the game. // If there is heavy suspicion on you, feel free to sacrifice yourself to protect your Yang: they will become the Yin-Yang and will carry on the game for you.
FIGHT: Pinning down the Yin’s safety net in the Yang is key to defeating this demon: if you can play patiently and gather information, you can execute the Yang once 4 or fewer players are left alive, ensuring that they cannot jump to the Yang. Look for players who are initially fine to be executed, but become increasingly cautious as time wears on, especially if a Yang is suspected to be found. They may be the recipient of a demon change during the night, and the Yin will not want to let that happen.
EX: Eric is the Yin who selects the Politician on Night 2, who dies. He then selects the Yang on Night 3, who becomes the evil Yin; Eric becomes the evil Yang. No-one dies at night. // William is the Seer who received their neighbour, claiming Noble, on Night 1. On Day 4, the Noble is reluctant to die: William discerns they may have been turned evil by the Yin's ability.

==== Yin-Yang (demon)
LEDE: The Yin-Yang, as a combined force of its two halves, is more powerful than ever.
HOW: Assess the game state before committing to two kills: this will almost certainly out that the Yin-Yang is in play - so if players have heavy suspicion about a particular player, it may be best to stick to single kills until it is most advantageous (ie. if town believes there is a Godfather who may kill after an Outsider death, if town believes there is an unspent Assassin, etc). // Keep in mind that in a Yin/Yang game, the only Demon available at setup is the Yin: the Yin-Yang is a conditional Demon that only appears if the conditions for its creation (outlined in the Yin’s ability) are met.
TIPS: You are a supercharged demon with the ability to kill twice per night with no downsides: use it! Given that the Yin-Yang typically appears later in the game, you have the ability to accelerate the endgame and draw things to a close quickly. As such, lay low, maintain your bluffs, and keep killing at night. If you wish to ensure that town doesn’t know that a Yin-Yang is now in play, you can kill dead players to ensure only one death occurs in the night. Use this false sense of security to turn up the heat later on. // Crucially, the Yin-Yang being in the game means that you definitely know who your other half is: use this to your advantage, support each other (or not, if there is heavy suspicion about!), and coordinate your information to ensure the best possible outcome.
FIGHT: Given the Yin-Yang’s ability to kill twice per night, be prepared for a short endgame. While storytellers will use discretion with regards to who dies at night, you can typically expect multiple kills. Rule out any sources of extra deaths such as the Assassin or Godfather, and re-evaluate your information to figure out who the most suspicious players are. If you’ve confirmed a Yin-Yang is in play, you’ve killed the Yin, and so you know that not only are you close to winning the game, but that there is a guaranteed dead evil player that has less impact on the game moving forward.
EX: Gory is the former good Yang, and newly created evil Yin-Yang. Harold, the former Yin, learns who they are. Gory selects two players at night: both die. // Winston is the Undertaker who knows that the Assassin is dead. On Night 4, there are two deaths. They know this can only be the Yin-Yang, and suspect that the player executed on Day 3 may have been the Yin.

==== Zwei (demon)
LEDE: The Zwei lies in wait, ready to act if the Ein should perish.
HOW: The Zwei breaks the usual rule that if more than one Demon lives, kills each night are arbitrary. // Remember the jinx with the Lunatic: if you intend to create a Lunatic Zwei, play with one extra Townsfolk or Outsider token, and claim they have been changed to the Zwei on Night 1. // Keep in mind that in a Ein/Zwei game, the only Demon available at setup is the Ein: the Zwei is selected on the Ein's first night and cannot be selected on its own.
TIPS: The Ein's strength is in numbers: while the Zwei doubles the amount of Demons on the Grimoire, making it more susceptible to Demon-finding roles like the Fortune Teller, it also creates an inbuilt Scarlet Woman to pass to should the need arise, and with its own ability to win when 3 players live, as well as the Zwei's ability to poison its good-aligned neighbours (for better or worse), you have tremendous strength to start, which wanes substantially if it - or you - are killed. While being the Zwei ensures you are at maximum power, remember that you're the fallback plan, so if you need to push on your Ein to buy credibility down the line, you may need to fall in line with the town's information. // Your ability to poison good neighbours can set up some interesting interactions, since unlike the No Dashii, you can poison Outsiders, leading to interactions that might have unforseen consequences. Get cosy with your neighbours, learn their roles, and try to use them to your advantage.
FIGHT: Two Demons on the board usually spells chaos for the town, but with an Ein in play, it's business as usual. Double the Demons in play means double the opportunities to find them, so get killing! Executing players who are seen as a viable Demon candidate may weaken the Ein substantially, so don't bide your time waiting for clarifying information, because you may not have the luxury of a final 3 to decide what is and what isn't. // You are forced to play offensive to weaken the Ein and ultimately win the game, not just because of its unique win condition, but because your information will be fractured and seemingly unreliable. Once you know it's in play, don't delay. // Remember that the Zwei poisons all good players - not just Townsfolk - so while you can build worlds as you would as if a No Dashii is in play, if Outsider abilities like that of the Recluse or Golem don't seem to work as intended, there's a good chance a Zwei is nearby.
EX: Scott is the Zealot who is chosen by Maurice, the Ein, to be the Zwei. Scott poisons his good neighbours - the Librarian who ultimately confirms him as the Zealot, and the Fortune Teller, who receives correct information, suggesting that Maurice is the Demon, but later receives a no on Scott. Scott rightly pushes on Maurice, who becomes the Ein once Maurice dies, riding his confirmation to a win. // Renee is the Golem. She nominates the claimed Washerwoman, who does not die. The Fisherman, confirmed by the Washerwoman, discerns that they cannot be the Demon given their very first chat together, which confirmed the Washerwoman's information. Renee correctly determines she is sat next to the Zwei, who forced her power to misfire.

==== Mad Scientist (traveler)
LEDE: The Mad Scientist brings the dead back to life... sort of.
HOW: If the Mad Scientist chooses a living player, prompt them to choose again.
TIPS: Whether good or evil, the Mad Scientist allows previously dead players to nominate and vote as normal, skewing town's numbers and keeping the game alive. // In "end game" situations where evil wins if a certain number of players live, this can create situations where the Mad Scientist is the last remaining line of defense, giving good one last shot at the Demon, or giving evil a guaranteed win, assuming all evils are left alive. // Bring back players you trust to corroborate (or corrupt!) certain pieces of information in order to maximise their effectiveness. // Also note that if you resurrect a player who was just killed by the Demon, while it may appear that no-one has died overnight, it may just be an effect of your ability. Watch for sudden deaths before dusk if good, and use it to your advantage if evil, as information will be poisoned for the players involved!
EX: The Mad Scientist is in play, and is evil. On Day 1, the Baron is executed. The Mad Scientist immediately brings them back to life, preventing the Oracle from receiving a 1 that night.

==== Tactician (traveler)
LEDE: The Tactician advises its troops to help win the war for its own side.
HOW: If the Tactician provides advice that is too specific, you may play a mediating role in offering advice that is less confirming or against the spirit of the character.
TIPS: Your advice can be used for good or ill, but remember that the Storyteller will always tell the player you've chosen whether the advice will help your team win! This means players will never be inclined to trust you fully, so speaking with your fellow players and gathering useful information is crucial to succeeding in your role. // If evil, your advice can be used to guide evil kills, or drive good players away from the truth, so be creative with the advice you offer, consider reinforcing wrong worlds, and drive town towards incorrect conclusions. You'll be found out eventually, but at least you'll have done your damage.
EX: The Tactician is in play, and is good. On Night 2, they provide advice to the Chef, telling them to look for an Outsider. The Chef receives this advice and a thumbs up. The Chef determines that the Recluse is sat next to a Minion.

==== Taxidermist (traveler)
LEDE: The Taxidermist allows the dead to nominate, and generously hands back ghost votes as a parting gift.
HOW: Remember to prompt the Taxidermist to choose their players prior to their departure. // If the Taxidermist has to leave suddenly, you may redistribute ghost votes arbitrarily.
TIPS: Whether you're good or evil, you're in play, so dead players can nominate! This is universally useful, and may provoke dead players to spend their ghost vote if they truly believe in a nomination. // Of course, if you are a good Taxidermist, you may want to reward their bold play by "refunding" their ghost vote upon your travelling out. But if you're evil? You may want to persuade players to spend their ghost vote, and give as few back as possible in return, burning up ghost votes that would otherwise be used in the closing stages of the game.
EX: The Taxidermist is in play, and is good. Three players spend ghost votes to nominate during the game, and the Taxidermist refunds two of them, suspecting the third to be an evil player. Those two players are free to vote again.

==== Peanut Gallery (fabled)
LEDE: The Peanut Gallery win and lose with their Chosen One.
HOW: Mark the player chosen by spectators as the "Chosen One" and announce it at the commencement of the game.
TIPS: Don't worry, this doesn't impact the game at all - it's just a bit of fun, and a way for spectators to interact with the game. It's okay if you're into horse racing instead.
EX: Michael is the Chosen One for this game, and is the Savant. The Demon is killed on Day 4, so Michael - and the spectators - win. Hooray.

==== Mercy Society (fabled)
LEDE: The Mercy Society gives players updates on who is winning the game, but doesn't favour a team.
CREDIT: Additional credit: Smokey & Annwithaplan
HOW: Try to balance the Mercy Society's ability between good and evil, as much as possible - and as much as necessary, depending on the game state. // It is recommended not to run the "Five Star General" variant of the General, and stick to just good, evil or neither. // If a General is in play, consider giving evil information on the same night the General receives false info, so that they have a chance to bluff what they receive.
TIPS: This Fabled is meant to guide players, both good and evil. Learning that one side is winning might give some clues about whether a particular night death was impactful, or whether a particular execution was worthwhile - information useful to both sides. Unlike the General, who generally plays for good, the Mercy Society is neutral, and will dispense its advice to both sides. // If a General is in play, the Mercy Society ensures the General receives false info once per game. This gives an evil player some leeway in terms of their information, so that they aren't caught in a lie accidentally. // This fabled is useful for newer players who don't know how to navigate the latter stages of a game, and might be a good fit thematically in some scripts.
EX: The Mercy Society is in play. Town executes the Empath on Day 1, and a good player learns that evil is winning. The next day, town executes the Baron. After killing the Chef, the Demon learns that neither side is winning.

==== Pyro (loric)
LEDE: The Pyro removes nominations, in favour of something much more explosive.
HOW: To activate the Pyro, click its token in the NPCs section. // Run a slightly extended "afternoon" chat, but make sure to cut off discussion at timer's end. // Deduct any spent ghost votes after the countdown, prior to announcing the execution. // In the event of a tie, no-one dies.
TIPS: No nominations means no accusation, no defense, and no majority. Your votes are more crucial than ever! Share your information freely, discuss and puzzle out a solve. // Remember that evil is similarly hamstrung by the Pyro, and so it's entirely possible to kill the Demon with only a few fingers pointing. // This Loric is recommended for scripts without unseen loss conditions, and therefore not recommended as part of a script containing a Saint, Evil Twin, or Vortox.
EX: The Pyro is in play. At the end of the day, the Storyteller counts down: the Oracle has 3 players pointing at them, and the Fang Gu has 2. 8 other players did not vote. A ghost vote is deducted from the Washerwoman, who pointed at the Fang Gu. The Oracle is executed.

==== Parasitoid (loric)
LEDE: The Parasitoid kills players' hosts, instead of themselves.
CREDIT: Additional credit: Cheese
HOW: It's good practice to note each "host" next to respective players to ensure you don't make mistakes when assigning kills. // If there is an odd number of players, one player can be their own host, and learn this. // Abilities that prevent death such as the Soldier or Devil's Advocate are ostensibly "extended" to the host. If deaths are announced during the day and the host is protected, announce both. ie. "Player A is executed and Player B does not die."
TIPS: If you're good, let your host know that you're their host! If they're inclined to believe you, they'll likely do what they can to keep you alive. // If you're evil, well, while you CAN let your host know, it may also be prudent to hide it. Better yet, perhaps you could consider misdirecting town by stating it's someone else. // Remember that abilities that prevent an individual from dying affect the host (first player). So, if you're next to a Tea Lady and want to test yourself, make sure your host is executed, and not yourself.
EX: The Parasitoid is in play. Rob, the Steward, learns Nathen, the Ojo, is his host. Rob tells Nathen, and to test the Tea Lady sat next to Rob, town decides to execute Nathen. Nathen does not die, and Rob does not die.

==== Present Peeker (townsfolk)
LEDE: (none)
HOW: 
TIPS: 
EX: 

==== Party Pooper (outsider)
LEDE: (none)
HOW: 
TIPS: 
EX: 

==== La Befana (minion)
LEDE: (none)
HOW: 
TIPS: 
EX: 

==== Krampus (demon)
LEDE: (none)
HOW: 
TIPS: 
EX: 

==== Santa Claus (loric)
LEDE: (none)
HOW: 
TIPS: 
EX: 


==== SCRIPTS
Game Changer [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Game%20Changer.json]
  A goofy script centered around the Chatterpox and the Arbiter - where the only way to learn is by playing, the only way to win is by learning, and the only way to stay alive is by following the rules. Or is it?
  This script is for: People who enjoy the fun kind of chaos, and not taking the game too seriously while still having a puzzle to solve.

Balance in All Things [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Balance%20in%20All%20Things.json]
  A script designed around the Yin and Yang. Find the Demon while keeping an eye on its good counterpart, lest it become evil - or worse.
  This script is for: People who don't mind living with the constant feeling that you're about to turn evil at a moment's notice. People who love a boss fight.

Belly Up [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Belly%20Up.json]
  A script designed to showcase the Polterghast. Maybe the Demon is dead - but maybe it's just playing.
  This script is for: People who like the idea of the Zombuul, but want games to last for less than 15 days. Zombuul enjoyers, assemble.

Sweet Nothings [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Sweet%20Nothings.json]
  A script designed around the Baku, Lost Lovers, and Mentalist. Get out there and talk to as many people as you can to help solve the game, but just know that you might be face to face with the Demon, keen to turn your information upside down.
  This script is for: Talkers, yappers, and everyone inbetween. This script encourages interaction and conversation, as well as tracking who speaks to whom.

Are We... the Bad Guys? [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Are%20We...%20The%20Bad%20Guys_.json]
  A script where good is just a state of mind. You can never be sure if you're good or evil - but if you are, you certainly can't let anyone know it. Not yet, anyway.
  This script is for: People who don't mind suddenly playing for evil, and people who don't mind selling out their evil team - maybe.

Resident, Evil [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Resident%2C%20Evil.json]
  A script designed around Patient Zero and the Doppelganger. The Demon kills and poisons next to executees, but how do you know who's sober, who's an Outsider, who's evil - and importantly, who's who?
  This script is for: People who don't mind being in an Evil Twin pair. Kinda.

Shadow of the Colossus [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Shadow%20of%20the%20Colossus.json]
  A script where the mighty Colossus takes over the town. Literally. Players next to the Colossus aren't safe from the unfortunate title of Outsider - not even sober, healthy Townsfolk.
  This script is for: People who love to puzzle out who the No Dashii has touched, and people who don't mind seeing: "You are the evil Fang Gu".

In Death - Is Life [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/In%20Death%20-%20Is%20Life.json]
  A script designed around death: who caused it, who prevented it, and who saw it coming. Features the Martyr, Necromancer, Guardian and Prophet.
  This script is for: People who are happy to embody the phrase: "death is not the end"; people who like a good snipe.

Tag, You're It [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Tag%2C%20You%27re%20It.json]
  A script designed around the terrifying Umbra, a hyper-mobile Demon who can swap place with evil Minions, and refresh their abilities in the process.
  This script is for: Demon-hunters who don't mind chasing rabbits down holes. Players who enjoy playing as evil, but don't love the burden of playing a Demon that has to tough it out all game.

When the Music Stops [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/When%20The%20Music%20Stops%281%29.json]
  A script designed around the Loric character, the Pyro. Nominations? Who needs 'em? Turn your eyes to the skies and point at the pretty fireworks instead. But beware, because at the end of each day, someone's liable to go boom.
  This script is for: People who hate accusations, defense, pertinent statements, and putting hands up.

Tick Tock [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Tick%20Tock.json]
  A script where information has the potential to go topsy-turvy every other night. Figure out whether information is correct or wrong to pin down the Demon and win the game.
  This script is for: People who enjoy hearing "is this a Vortox game?" but don't enjoy it when people are able to confirm it.

True Colours [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/True%20Colours.json]
  A script designed around the Chameleon, whose powers change each night. With so many combinations and pairs of abilities, you'll may never truly know whether you're hurting or helping.
  This script is for: Lovers of the Philosopher, and people who love to solve a puzzle, as long as they are the puzzle themselves.

Way of the Samurai [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Way%20of%20the%20Samurai.json]
  A script designed around the Ronin, who grows in power when their allied player is slain by the Demon. With some nights of no deaths, and some nights of many deaths, the Ronin is tasked with navigating many sources of death to win in the end.
  This script is for: People who like "swingy" games, and those who don't mind a bit of poisoning.

Choose Your Own Adventure [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Choose%20Your%20Own%20Adventure.json]
  The Smith makes it debut in this script, able to craft an ability of their own choosing. But unfortunately, the Smith isn't the only one who can make the rules, with the Wizard, Mechanical Man and others causing chaos around it.
  This script is for: "Chaos" players who don't mind not knowing what's going on, and people who want something different.

Firestarter [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Firestarter.json]
  Bomb! This script is centered around the Firebug, the explosive Minion who passes a killer hot potato around town in an attempt to take town down as quickly as possible.
  This script is for: Quick games, people who like hidden mechanics, and lovers of Pass the Parcel.

The Fix Is Sin [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/The%20Fix%20is%20Sin.json]
  Pick a side, any side. The Fixer is an Outsider who plays only for themselves, and for their chosen players. Good and evil is all relative, really.
  This script is for: Competitive horse racers, gamblers, and people who don't mind going turncoat in an instant.

Secret Ballot [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Secret%20Ballot.json]
  Designed around the Crook, this script keeps nominations hidden, turning a regular game of Clocktower on its head. Who knows who's on the block today? Probably the Crook.
  This script is for: Fans of big mechanical changes, Organ Grinder enjoyers, and Bishop defenders.

Who Do You Think You Are? [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Who%20Do%20You%20Think%20You%20Are_.json]
  It's THE EGOTIST! This conceited Outsider drunks anyone who would dare accuse them of evil, and wouldn't dare have themselves executed for another's crimes. But they may just end up being the one who did it.
  This script is for: People who love a bit of drama, and hate self-nominations.

Wispr In The Wind [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Wispr%20in%20the%20Wind.json]
  A script designed around the Wispr, who can change the physical makeup of the Grimoire by secretly seating itself between others. Do you know who your neighbours are?
  This script is for: People who like to solve a tricky puzzle, or people who enjoy playing chill Minions.

The Imperial Palace [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/The%20Imperial%20Palace.json]
  Turn Clocktower on its head with an outed Demon who kills indiscriminately! The Shogun doesn't know its Minions, and kills during the day. Outpace the Shogun, eliminate its Minions, and sprint to the finish, but beware executing the Shogun until you're certain!
  This script is for: People who want a fast, swingy game with plenty of chaos, and people who don't mind playing a stressful Demon.

Stayin' Alive [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Stayin%27%20Alive.json]
  Who's alive? Who's dead? There's no way to truly know with the Embalmer in play. Confirm deaths through other means - but with the Demon poisoning, corrupting information or just slaughtering en masse, if you aren't careful, it may already be too late. You want the Barrow-Fog? We have a Barrow-Fog at home.
  This script is for: Lovers of the Barrow-Fog, or haters of the Barrow-Fog.

Switcheroo [http://menagerie.towerrangers.net/repo/Switcheroo.json]
  You feel a square token in the bag. Do you take it? The Eccentric is the Outsider nobody dares speak of, but many know of. Combined with the Counterfeiter, who can snoop at the Grimoire and change the state of the game, this script results in weird, wonderful game states where nothing is as it seems.
  This script is for: Chaos goblins, rule breakers, and risk-takers.


==== HOME
A homebrew almanac for the board game Blood on the Clocktower
A homebrew almanac for the board game Blood on the Clocktower
The Menagerie is an almanac for a collection of homebrew characters for Blood on the Clocktower designed to be adapted to scripts containing standard Clocktower characters. Think of it as an "expansion pack"!
Please contact me on Discord (@Goodpart) if something isn't working, or if you have any feedback. Although tested for balance, these characters have not been run with every given permutation of scripts, and so your comments are absolutely welcome - especially around jinxes, if there are any interactions that feel particularly fun/awful.
Thanks to all the players who were patient with me while testing, thanks to friends who talked through concepts and got these characters working in the first place, and of course, thanks to The Pandemonium Institute for making such a wonderful game.
DOWNLOADS
DOWNLOAD THE MENAGERIE (v.1.17)
...and import it into the updated Blood on the Clocktower Script Tool. If kept in the list of scripts, characters from The Menagerie should be freely available for any future scripts.
BROWSE SCRIPTS
...featuring characters from The Menagerie.
COMMUNITY SCRIPTS
...featuring characters from The Menagerie.
EXPLORE CHARACTERS BY TYPE
Need help?
Learn more about basic JSON editing, including how to insert custom characters into your script.
Development Log
"Why did you do this?" and other questions answered. Maybe.
Newest Characters: the Barfly, Eccentric and Counterfeiter!
UPDATES:
04/08/26: 1.17: Reworked "Medicine Man" and "Cartographer". Tweaks to "Ronin", "Arbiter", "Crook", "Firebug", "Necromancer" and "Shogun". Added the Development Log and Community Scripts sections.
16/07/26: 1.15: Happy Clocktower Con AU! Added "Barfly" (thanks Twindels), "Eccentric" and "Counterfeiter" (thanks George). Updated all scripts and links to match the new domain: please re-download The Menagerie and all scripts for full functionality!
09/06/26: 1.14: Added "Embalmer". Added script "Stayin' Alive". Slight changes to "Hypnox".
03/05/26: 1.13: Added "Astrologer". Consistency corrections for a number of characters (thanks Fafa). Changed "Banker".
26/03/26: 1.12: Added script "The Imperial Palace". Fixes for "Shogun" and "Ein".
20/03/26: 1.11: Added "Shogun".
19/03/26: 1.10: Night order changes. Amended all current scripts. Added several new scripts.
17/03/26: 1.09: Added "Firebug".
08/03/26: 1.08: Added "Tactician" and "Mad Scientist".
04/03/26: 1.071: Added a jinx for "Ein". Wording fixes for "Cleric".
03/03/26: 1.07: Added "Smith". Rework of "Baku". Added a jinx for "Zwei".
01/03/26: 1.061: Disambiguations/updates for "Cleric", "Daredevil", "Ein" and "Zwei".
27/02/26: 1.06: Updated "Cleric", "Daredevil", "Crook", "Ein" and "Zwei".
26/02/26: 1.05: Various wording tweaks. Added "Fixer", "Cleric", "Daredevil", "Snoop", "Crook", "Ein" and "Zwei".
28/11/25: 1.04: Various night order fixes. Re-uploaded sample scripts to fix old Script Tool night order bug, and to amend flavour text. Added "Ronin". Minor changes to "Hypnox", "Thrall", "Missionary", "Banker". Added new script "Way of the Samurai". Added "Egotist".
16/11/25: 1.03: Updated "Muckraker", "Record Keeper", "Medicine Man", "Sleeper". Updated wording for "Gerrymanderer". Added "Parasitoid". Added a secret thing.
06/11/25: 1.02: Added "Chameleon". Added 13 new scripts featuring Menagerie characters.
05/11/25: 1.01: Updated image links for the "Arbiter". Adjusted night order for a number of roles for better compatibility with existing characters.
03/11/25: Added the Loric section. Added "Pyro". Published The Menagerie 1.0.
02/11/25: Added "Mime".
20/10/25: Added "Thrall", "Banker" and "Cartographer".
03/10/25: Added "Colossus", "Shinkan", and "Houndmaster".
24/07/25: Site created. All existing homebrew characters added.
Blood on the Clocktower and any associated characters are trademark of Steven Medway and The Pandemonium Institute.
This almanac is unofficial fan content for Blood on the Clocktower, and is not affiliated with, nor endorsed by The Pandemonium Institute.
These characters are provided "as-is", freely available to anyone who wishes to use them. If you wish to retool these characters, please ask me prior to any edits. While I don't claim ownership over character ideas, I've noticed several instances of close copies of my work being posted publicly.
This is strictly a hobby of mine, and don't expect payment: but if you'd like to tip me as thanks, you can buy me a coffee.
is it me you're looking for?

==== PROBLEMS
JSON-only (no almanac page): presentpeeker
JSON-only (no almanac page): partypooper
JSON-only (no almanac page): labefana
JSON-only (no almanac page): krampus
JSON-only (no almanac page): santaclaus
